

--- Page 1 ---

It’s Easy to File and Pay 
Electronically!
Check our online services at 
MTRevenue.gov
Choose e-file and direct deposit for a faster refund!
2024 Montana Form 2
Individual Income Tax Instructions
Call us at (406) 444-6900
MTRevenue.gov
MONTANA DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE


--- Page 2 ---

Dear Montana Taxpayer,
We want to thank you for filing your Montana tax return. Your timely filing and prompt 
payment of taxes greatly benefits your community and helps to make Montana a better 
place for all of us.
We continue to encourage you to file electronically if possible. Ninety-three percent of 
individual Montana taxpayers electronically filed their 2023 tax returns.
Take advantage of these benefits with electronic filing:	
●Taxpayers have found that e-filing is easy, convenient, and ensures more
accurate processing.	
●Electronic filing can also help you more quickly receive any refund you are owed.
Be sure to visit MTRevenue.gov to learn more about filing options.
We are committed to assisting you with any questions you may have about your filing 
requirements. If you need more information or help, please visit MTRevenue.gov, 
call (406) 444-6900 or Montana Relay at 711 for the hearing impaired, or 
email DORHelp@mt.gov.
Best regards,
Your Montana Department of Revenue
V5 12/17/2024


--- Page 3 ---

Property Tax Assistance Program 
(PTAP)	
●If you qualify for PTAP, your property
taxes could be significantly reduced.	
●Your 2023 Federal Adjusted Gross
Income (FAGI), excluding capital and
income losses, must be less than
$28,329 for a single applicant and
$37,968 for married applicants and head
of household. Spouses’ incomes are
included whether or not the spouse is an
owner of the property.	
●You must own or currently be under
contract for deed to purchase your home
or mobile/manufactured home.	
●You have to live in the home for at least
seven months of the year.	
●The benefit only applies to the first
$350,000 of value of your primary
residence. For agricultural and timber
parcels, the only eligible land is the
one-acre home site.
Montana Disabled Veteran (MDV) 
Property Tax Relief	
●If you qualify for MDV, your property
taxes could be significantly reduced.	
●You must be a 100% disabled veteran 
whose disability is service-connected,
or the unmarried surviving spouse of a 
deceased veteran who was 100% disabled.	
●Your 2023 Federal Adjusted Gross Income
(FAGI), excluding capital and income
losses, must be less than $61,071 for a
single applicant and $70,467 for married
applicants and head of household.
Spouses’ incomes are included whether
or not the spouse is an owner of the
property. Unmarried surviving spouses’
FAGI must be less than $53,242.	
●You must own or currently be under
contract for deed to purchase your home
or mobile/manufactured home.	
●You have to live in the home for at least
seven months of the year.	
●The benefit only applies to your primary
residence. For agricultural and timber
parcels, the only eligible land is the
one-acre home site.
How Do I Apply?	
●PTAP and MDV application forms are available at MTRevenue.gov or call your local
Department of Revenue field office and request an application form be mailed to
you. You can find contact information for field offices at MTRevenue.gov, or call us at
(406) 444-6900, or Montana Relay at 711 for the hearing impaired.	
●Once you have applied, we will notify you each year whether you qualify. You will be
included in the program’s annual income verification until you move from your residence.	
●If you miss the deadline, submit an application as soon as possible so we can include you
in the income verification process for next year.
DON’T MISS OUT! Apply by April 15
You might qualify for these tax assistance programs.


--- Page 4 ---

Contents
What’s New.....................................................................................................................i
Income Tax Simplification.........................................................................................i
Other Legislation Affecting Tax Year 2024...............................................................ii
Form Changes.........................................................................................................ii
General Instructions........................................................................................................1
Filing Requirements.................................................................................................1
Due Dates................................................................................................................3
How to File...............................................................................................................3
Amending Your 2024 Return....................................................................................4
Interest Rate for 2025..............................................................................................4
Line Instructions..............................................................................................................5
Personal Information................................................................................................5
Residency Status.....................................................................................................5
North Dakota Reciprocity.........................................................................................6
Page 1......................................................................................................................7
Montana Individual Income Tax Calculation............................................................11
Direct Deposit.........................................................................................................12
Signature, Paid Preparer, and Third-Party Designee..............................................13
2024 Montana Ordinary Income Tax Rates....................................................................14
Schedule I – Montana Adjustments to Federal Taxable Income....................................15
Schedule II – Tax on Montana Source Income...............................................................22
Schedule III – Tax Credits..............................................................................................29
Schedule IV – Contributions, Penalties, Interest, and Other Taxes................................34
Schedule V – Amended Return Information...................................................................38
Schedule 2EC – Elderly Homeowner/Renter Credit......................................................38
Transition Schedule........................................................................................................41


--- Page 5 ---

Page i
2024 Montana Form 2 Instructions
What’s New
Income Tax Simplification
Montana Form 2 has been redesigned as a result 
of legislation passed in 2021. This legislation 
significantly altered Montana’s individual income 
tax system by making changes to filing statuses, 
tax brackets, and the calculation of Montana 
taxable income.
Filing statuses. Under the new law, taxpayers 
must use the same filing status used on the 
federal tax return.
Married taxpayers can no longer file separately 
from their spouses unless they are filing 
separately for federal purposes. Capital losses, 
passive losses, and excess business losses will 
no longer be allocated by spouse, and they are 
included in Montana taxable income to the extent 
they are included in federal taxable income. 
Montana residents with nonresident or part-year 
resident spouses must also use the same federal 
filing status and use Schedule II, Tax on Montana 
Source Income, to determine the tax liability on 
their Montana source income.
Filing requirements. The Montana tax filing 
requirement follows the federal tax filing requirement 
after considering any Montana additions and 
subtractions to federal taxable income.
New tax rates. Montana’s tax brackets have 
been reduced from seven rates to two rates and 
are based on a taxpayer’s filing status.
Additionally, net long-term capital gains are 
now taxed at lower rates than Montana ordinary 
income. Montana ordinary income is all income 
that is not considered a net long-term capital 
gain. As a result, the capital gains tax credit has 
been repealed.
The 2024 tax tables are on page 14.
Montana taxable income calculation. Taxpayers 
must use their federal taxable income, adjusted 
to remove the federal qualified business income 
deduction under IRC 199A, as the base for 
calculating their Montana taxable income. Montana’s 
previous system used federal adjusted gross income 
as the base for determining Montana taxable 
income. With this change, items of income and 
deduction are no longer recalculated for purposes 
of determining Montana taxable income. Taxable 
Social Security income and net operating losses are 
included in Montana taxable income as calculated for 
federal tax purposes.
New subtraction. Taxpayers aged 65 and over 
receive a $5,500 subtraction from federal taxable 
income. If filing jointly and both spouses are 65 
and over, the subtraction is equal to $11,000. The 
subtraction will be adjusted annually for inflation 
beginning with tax year 2025.
Repealed deductions. Several deductions have 
been repealed, including:	
●Unemployment compensation	
●Tip income for certain service industry
workers	
●Partial interest income deduction for
taxpayers aged 65 or older	
●Partial pension, annuity, and IRA deduction	
●Worker’s compensation benefits not already
excluded in federal adjusted gross income	
●Health insurance premiums paid by an
employer for an employee	
●Contributions to a Montana First-Time
Homebuyer Savings Account	
●Deposits in a Montana Farm and Ranch Risk
Management Account	
●Dependent child’s income included in the
taxpayer’s federal adjusted gross income	
●Student loan repayments for health care
professionals and qualified educators	
●Partial retirement disability deduction for
taxpayers under age 65
Montana net operating loss repealed. The 
Montana net operating loss adjustment under 
section 15-30-2119, MCA, was repealed as of 
January 1, 2024.
Transition adjustments. A taxpayer may make 
an election on a timely filed (including extensions) 
2024 Form 2 to reconcile the difference in the 
federal and Montana amounts of passive activity 
losses and short-term and long-term capital 
losses. There is also an adjustment for taxpayers 
These instructions are designed to address the laws for most tax filing situations. If you have a 
unique situation that is not addressed in the booklet, please refer to Title 15 of Montana law found 
at leg.mt.gov or call us with your questions.


--- Page 6 ---

Page ii
2024 Montana Form 2 Instructions
with a basis in an asset that is different from the 
federal basis. If the Montana carryover amount 
or basis is smaller than the federal amount, 
the taxpayer will make a positive adjustment to 
reconcile the difference. If the Montana carryover 
amount or basis is larger than the federal 
amount, the taxpayer will make a negative 
adjustment to reconcile the difference. This also 
includes any tax refund received in 2024 that 
reduced Montana taxes. Taxpayers must use 
Montana Transition Schedule to make the 
election and report any adjustment.
Other Legislation Affecting Tax Year 2024
Military Retirement Income and Survivor 
Benefits Exemption for Certain Taxpayers. 
Under Senate Bill 104, certain taxpayers may be 
eligible for an exemption of part of their military 
retirement income. Taxpayers who become 
residents after June 30, 2023, or who were 
Montana residents before receiving military 
retirement can exempt the lesser of:	
●50 percent of the taxpayer’s military
retirement income received from Defense
Finance and Accounting Service (DFAS), or	
●The total Montana source income from	
○Wages, salary, and tips from
compensation performed in Montana	
○Net income from a trade or business	
○Net income from farming activities
in Montana
The exemption is only available for five consecutive 
years after becoming a resident. If the taxpayer was 
a resident and began receiving military retirement 
while a resident of the state before July 1, 2023, 
the exemption can only be claimed for five years 
beginning with tax year 2024.
Beneficiaries receiving military survivor benefits are 
eligible for a subtraction of 50 percent of the benefits 
if they became residents after June 30, 2023, or 
were residents before receiving the benefits.
This exemption is claimed on Form WMRE.
Expanded Qualified Endowment Credit. The 
Qualified Endowment Credit, a tax credit for 
taxpayers that make charitable donations to 
qualified endowments, has increased. The credit 
is equal to 40% of the present value of a planned 
gift up to $15,000.
Reduced Tax Rate and Increased Earned 
Income Tax Credit. Under Senate Bill 399 (2021), 
the top marginal tax rate was initially reduced 
from 6.75% to 6.5% beginning with tax year 2024. 
Senate Bill 121 (2023) further reduced the top 
marginal tax rate from 6.5% to 5.9%. The Montana 
Earned Income Tax Credit increased from 3% of 
the federal credit to 10% of the federal credit.
Income Tax Filing Exemption for Certain 
Nonresidents. House Bill 447 created an income 
tax filing exemption for nonresident individuals 
that earned only wages for services performed 
in Montana for less than 30 days and worked in 
more than one state during the tax year. These 
nonresidents do not have an income tax filing 
requirement and their employers do not have a 
wage withholding requirement. The exemption 
does not apply to professional athletes, 
entertainers, persons that perform services for 
compensation on a per-event basis, construction 
workers, employees with annual salaries of 
more than $500,000, and qualified production 
employees for the purposes of the MEDIA Credit.
This exemption only applies to wage withholding 
requirements and does not affect the 
determination of a business’s nexus in Montana.
Form Changes
Form 2 has changed as a result of income tax 
simplification. The form will no longer consist of 
every schedule that a taxpayer may use to file the 
Form 2. Schedules have been separated from the 
Form 2 and are available on separate pages.
Pages 1 and 2. Most taxpayers will only need to 
complete pages 1 and 2 to file their Montana tax 
return. Page 1 includes your Montana taxable 
income, credits, payments, and your tax liability. 
Page 2 is used to calculate the Montana resident 
income tax liability.
To determine Montana taxable income, taxpayers 
report federal adjusted gross income, the federal 
standard or adjusted itemized deductions, and 
Montana additions and subtractions, including 
an additional subtraction of $5,500 for taxpayers 
aged 65 and older ($11,000 for joint filers with both 
spouses aged 65 and over).
All payments, including payments and refunds 
from filing an amended return are now reported 
on page 1. Previously, payments, other than 


--- Page 7 ---

Page iii
2024 Montana Form 2 Instructions
wage withholding and withholding reported 
on a Form 1099, were reported on the Other 
Payments and Refundable Credits Schedule. 
Additionally, refunds or a carryforward of an 
overpayment reported on an amended return is 
now reported on page 1.
The Montana tax liability is calculated on page 2. 
Previously, taxpayers calculated their Montana 
tax liability on the Tax Liability Schedule. This 
page is used to figure both the resident Montana 
Ordinary Income Tax and Montana Net Long-
Term Capital Gains Tax. Nonresident, part-
year residents, and residents filing jointly with 
nonresident or part-year resident spouses figure 
their resident tax on page 2, then transfer that 
amount to Schedule II to determine the tax 
liability on their Montana source income.
Subsequent schedules previously included on 
the Form 2 have been redesigned or eliminated 
as a result of the new law. Schedules are also 
separated from the main form and are only 
included with the Form 2 if a taxpayer reports 
information on that particular schedule.
Schedule I – Montana Adjustments to Federal 
Taxable Income. Schedule I reports Montana 
adjustments, which are additions, subtractions, 
and Montana Medical Savings Account 
information. The items reported on this schedule 
were previously reported on the Additions, 
Subtractions, and Montana Medical Savings 
Account (MSA) Schedules.
In Part I, taxpayers report Montana additions and 
subtractions to federal taxable income. Taxpayers 
with Montana Medical Savings Accounts calculate 
the addition or subtraction on Part II of the Schedule.
Schedule II – Tax on Montana Source Income. 
Previously, nonresidents and part-year residents 
reported their Montana source income and 
determined the nonresident/part-year resident 
ratio on the Nonresident/Part-Year Resident 
Ratio Schedule. This information, along with the 
determination of Montana tax, is now reported on 
Schedule II. Additionally, Montana residents filing 
jointly with nonresident or part-year resident spouses 
use Schedule II to determine their Montana tax.
Schedule III – Tax Credits. This schedule is used 
to report Montana nonrefundable and refundable 
tax credits, and to calculate the credit for income 
taxes paid to another state or country. Previously, 
nonrefundable tax credits were reported on the 
Nonrefundable Credits Schedule and refundable 
tax credits were reported on the Other Payments 
and Refundable Credits Schedule.
The credit for income taxes paid to another state 
or country was previously reported on the Credit 
for Income Tax Paid to Another State or Country 
Schedule. The credit calculation has changed 
because of the new net long-term capital gains tax.
Schedule IV – Contributions, Penalties, 
Interest, and Other Taxes. Schedule IV 
is used to report check-off contributions, 
penalties, interest, and recapture and lump sum 
taxes. Check-off contributions, interest on the 
underpayment of estimated taxes, and penalties 
were previously reported on the Contributions, 
Penalties, and Interest Schedule. Lump sum and 
recapture taxes were previously reported on the 
Tax Liability Schedule.
Schedule V – Amended Return Information. 
Taxpayers amending a 2024 Form 2 report 
information about the amendment on Schedule V. 
This information was previously reported on 
page 2 of the Form 2.
Schedule 2EC – Montana Elderly Homeowner/
Renter Credit. The Schedule 2EC was formerly 
the Elderly Homeowner/Renter Credit Schedule. 
The Attestation section was added to reinforce the 
eligibility requirements to claim the credit. In an 
effort to ensure all household income is reported, 
as well as verify that only one credit is claimed 
per household, the form now asks for the number 
of persons living in the household. The reporting 
of household income on lines 1 through 18 was 
expanded because the items included in household 
income are no longer reported on the Form 2. 
Previously, this information was found on Form 2, 
pages 1 and 3. The calculation and amount of the 
credit remain unchanged.
Transition Schedule. The Transition Schedule is 
a schedule only available for tax year 2024 that a 
taxpayer may use to make an election to reconcile 
the difference in the federal and Montana amounts 
of passive activity losses, short-term and long-term 
capital losses, and any differing bases. Taxpayers 


--- Page 8 ---

Page iv
2024 Montana Form 2 Instructions
must use the Transition Schedule to make the 
election and report any adjustment. The election 
can only be made on a timely-filed Form 2 
(including extensions).
Form DE. The Form DE is new as of 
tax year 2024 and is used to report Montana 
source business income of single member limited 
liability companies (LLC) and sole proprietorships 
owned by nonresident individuals, estates, 
and trusts. This form is also used to figure the 
alternative method tax for eligible nonresidents 
under section 15-30-2104, MCA.
Calculation of Interest on Underpayment of 
Estimated Taxes Worksheet. This worksheet 
was previously on page 11 of the Form 2. It can 
now be found in the instructions on page 35.
Discontinued Worksheets and Schedules. 
The following worksheets and schedules have 
been discontinued because their underlying 
provisions have been repealed.
	
●Filing Status 2a Payment Schedule
	
●Refund Schedule
	
●Schedule 1
	
●Partial Pension, Annuity, and IRA Income 
Exemption Worksheet
	
●Taxable Social Security Benefits Worksheet
	
●Standard Deduction Worksheet
	
●Itemized Deductions Schedule
	
●Form 2441-M, Child and Dependent Care 
Expense Deduction
	
●Form FRM, Farm and Ranch Risk 
Management Account
	
●Form FTB, First-Time Homebuyer Savings 
Account
	
●Form VT, Veterans’ Program Contribution 
and Deduction
	
●Form NOL, Montana Net Operating Loss


--- Page 9 ---

Page 1 of 43
2024 Montana Form 2 Instructions
General Instructions
Filing Requirements
Do you have to file? In general, if during the tax 
year you were a resident or part-year resident 
of Montana, or if you were a nonresident who 
received Montana source income; and you had a 
requirement to file a federal tax return, then you 
must file a Montana income tax return. If you did 
not have a federal filing requirement, but have a 
Montana addition or subtraction, you also must file 
a Montana income tax return.
Important: If you qualify for the federal Earned 
Income Tax Credit, you may qualify for the 
Montana Earned Income Tax Credit. However, 
you must file a Montana income tax return to 
claim the credit. More information about the 
Earned Income Tax Credit is on page 8.
If you qualify for the Elderly Homeowner Renter 
Credit, you must file a Form 2 and attach a copy 
of the Schedule 2EC to claim the credit. You may 
also file Schedule 2EC directly with us on our 
TransAction Portal at https://tap.dor.mt.gov. Under 
the Individuals section, click File Schedule 2EC – 
Elderly Homeowner/Renter Credit.
Thirty-Day Nonresident Worker Filing 
Exclusion
There is a filing exclusion for certain nonresidents. 
Nonresidents who earned only wages for services 
performed in Montana for 30 days or less and 
worked in more than one state during the tax year 
do not have to file a tax return or pay tax to Montana 
on that income. The exclusion does not apply to the 
following types of employees: professional athletes, 
entertainers, persons that perform services for 
compensation on a per-event basis, construction 
workers, employees with annual salaries of more 
than $500,000, and qualified production employees 
for the purposes of the MEDIA Credit.
If a nonresident employee worked in Montana for 
more than 30 days or only worked in Montana, 
then all income earned while working in the state 
is taxable to Montana and the employee must 
follow the general filing requirement. Additionally, 
this exclusion does not apply to nonresident 
employees who have other Montana source 
income. For example, a nonresident employee 
worked in Montana for 15 days. The nonresident 
also has a rental property located in Montana. 
This nonresident’s wages and rental income are 
taxable to Montana.
This exclusion does not apply to self-employed 
taxpayers, such as a sole proprietors or owners 
of pass-through entities, or any other Montana 
source income.
If your employer withheld Montana taxes from your 
wages and you are eligible for the exclusion, you 
must file a Montana income tax return to receive 
a refund of your withholding. To claim a refund of 
your withholding:
1.	Complete the personal information section 
at the top of page 1, as instructed.
2.	Mark the box for “Nonresident.”
3.	Complete page 1, lines 1 through 3 and 7. 
Report your Montana wage withholding on 
line 11a and 11. Then, enter this amount on 
lines 21, 23, and 26.
4.	File your form with a copy of your federal 
return. Also include Form(s) W-2 showing 
Montana income tax withholding and a 
statement that you are claiming a thirty-day 
nonresident exemption with the dates you 
worked in Montana.
Filing Requirement for Taxpayers with Losses
If you incurred or reported capital or passive 
losses, you must file a Montana tax return to 
track the sourcing of the losses and to use those 
losses in calculating your tax liability. Unreported 
losses may lead to the disallowance of their use 
in future years.
Enrolled Member of a Tribe
Generally, if you are an enrolled member of a 
tribe and you live on the reservation governed by 
your tribe, you have a Montana filing requirement. 
You can subtract your income sourced to your 
reservation from your federal taxable income on 
Schedule I, Montana Adjustments Schedule.
Income that can be sourced to the reservation 
governed by your tribe includes:
	
●wages earned within the exterior boundaries 
of your reservation
	
●all interest, dividends, pensions, annuities, 
and any income received from the use of 
intangible properties


--- Page 10 ---

Page 2 of 43
2024 Montana Form 2 Instructions
	
●income, including farming, from real 
properties located within the exterior 
boundaries of your reservation
	
●business income from activities carried on within 
the exterior boundaries of your reservation
Items of income that are not sourced to your 
reservation are taxable and must be reported on 
Form 2. Income sourced elsewhere includes:
	
●wages earned outside the exterior boundaries 
of the reservation governed by your tribe
	
●any income linked to real estate properties 
located outside the exterior boundaries of the 
reservation governed by your tribe
	
●any business income stemming from activities 
carried on outside the exterior boundaries of 
the reservation governed by your tribe
You may source business income from a pass-
through entity to your reservation using a reasonable 
method suited to the nature of the business. Income 
already sourced to a state other than Montana can 
never be sourced to your reservation.
Use Form ETM instead of Form 2 only if all your 
income can be subtracted from Montana income 
tax as a tribal member. You may file the Form 
ETM directly with us on our TransAction Portal 
at tap.dor.mt.gov. Under the Quick Links section, 
click File a Return, then select File Exempt 
Income Certification/Return (Form ETM).
If all your income can be subtracted from Montana 
source income as a tribal member but you had any 
Montana withholding or tax paid on your behalf 
by an employer, pass-through entity, or remitter; 
carryforward of taxes paid in a prior year; or 
estimated tax payments, you must file a Form 2 
to receive a refund of withholding on your exempt 
income. Follow the steps below to do this:
1.	Complete the personal information at the 
top of page 1, as instructed.
2.	Complete page 1, lines 1 through 3.
3.	 Complete the Form ETM, reporting the exempt 
income and enter the total exempt income on 
Schedule I, line 13 and page 1, line 5.
4.	Report the credit and/or withholding on the 
appropriate line on page 1.
5.	 File this form with a copy of your federal return. 
Also include Form(s) W-2 showing Montana 
income tax withholding and your Form ETM.
If only part of your income can be subtracted from 
Montana income tax, and your nonexempt income 
exceeds the filing thresholds, you must file Form 2 
and include Form ETM. When you are required 
to file a Form 2, use Schedule I to subtract your 
exempt income from federal taxable income.
If you did not have a federal filing requirement, 
but have any Montana additions or subtractions 
(including your nonexempt income) you also must 
file a Form 2, even if Montana taxable income is 
zero or less.
If you do not file either Form 2 or Form ETM, you 
are declaring that your income is not exempt and 
we may file a return on your behalf to estimate 
your tax liability.
Important: If you live outside the boundaries of the 
reservation governed by your tribe, or if you live on 
another reservation that is not governed by your 
tribe, none of your income can be sourced to the 
reservation governed by your tribe.
Note: Income derived directly from allotted or 
restricted lands that are held in trust by the 
United States and exempt from federal income 
tax is also exempt from Montana income tax.
Military Servicemembers and Spouses
Resident Active Duty Servicemembers and Spouses 
of Resident Active Duty Servicemembers.
If you are a Montana resident receiving military 
compensation as a member of the regular U.S. 
Armed Forces on active duty, or a resident 
spouse of an active duty military servicemember 
you have a Montana filing requirement. While 
resident servicemembers must file a Montana 
tax return, basic, special, and incentive pay are 
not taxable in Montana. See the Schedule I 
instructions for more information.
Under the federal law, Montana resident spouses 
of active duty servicemembers report all their 
income to their state of residency, even if 
stationed outside of that state. Wages of resident 
spouses are sourced to Montana and not to the 
state where they were earned.


--- Page 11 ---

Page 3 of 43
2024 Montana Form 2 Instructions
Nonresident Active Duty Servicemembers and 
Spouses of Active Duty Servicemembers.
Nonresident military servicemembers and 
their spouses may have a filing requirement in 
certain cases.
Generally, if you are a nonresident military 
servicemember or nonresident spouse of an 
active duty servicemember and you do not have 
any other Montana source income, you do not 
have a filing requirement.
If you do have Montana source income, such as 
rental income from a Montana property, you have a 
Montana filing requirement. However, active duty pay 
for a servicemember and compensation for personal 
services of a nonresident spouse of an active duty 
servicemember are never taxable to Montana.
Compensation of personal services of 
nonresident spouses of military servicemembers 
qualify for relief from Montana taxation under 
federal law if:
	
●You are the spouse of a nonresident military 
servicemember; and
	
●You are in Montana solely to be with your 
military spouse who is serving in compliance 
with military orders; and
	
●You and your spouse have the same 
resident state.
If you meet all of these conditions, your 
compensation for personal services earned in 
Montana cannot be sourced to Montana. This 
income remains taxable in your state of residency.
If your employer withheld Montana income tax 
and you have no other Montana source income, 
you must complete Form 2, pages 1 and 2, to 
request the refund as follows:
1.	Complete the personal information section 
at the top of page 1, as instructed.
2.	Mark the box for “Nonresident.”
3.	Complete page 1, lines 1 through 3 and 7. 
Report your Montana wage withholding on 
line 11a and 11. Then, enter this amount on 
lines 21, 23, and 26.
4.	File your form with a copy of your federal 
return. Also include Form(s) W-2 showing 
Montana income tax withholding along with 
a statement that you are a nonresident 
spouse of an active duty servicemember.
If you or your spouse have Montana source 
income, such as rental income from real 
property located in Montana, you must file as 
nonresidents. Report this income on Schedule II, 
Tax on Montana Source Income. However, do not 
include your wages on Schedule II, line 1.
If you do not want your employer to withhold 
Montana income tax from your wages, you must 
claim the military spouse exemption on Montana 
Form MW-4 and give that form to your employer.
Due Dates
File Form 2 and pay the tax due by April 15, 2025. 
An automatic extension of six months applies for 
filing your return, but this extension does not apply 
to payments.
If you file after the extended due date, you may have 
to pay a penalty for late filing. See the Schedule IV 
instructions about interest and penalties.
If you were serving in, or in support of, the U.S. 
Armed Forces in a designated combat zone or 
contingency operation, the extension of time to 
file your Montana tax return is the same as the 
extension you receive for your federal tax return. 
See the IRS Publication 3 for more information.
How to File
Electronic Filing.
Filing electronically is recommended for faster, 
more accurate, and more secure service. If 
receiving a refund, you will receive it more quickly 
by filing electronically than if you file on paper.
You may be eligible for free tax software from 
Free File Alliance. Find Free File Alliance offers at 
MTRevenue.gov.
Paper Filing
If you choose to file a paper return, you must 
complete your federal Form 1040 first. Use blue 
or black ink to complete Montana Form 2.
You must sign and mail pages 1 and 2 to us. Include 
all schedules you were required to complete.
If you are filing your return on paper, you 
must include your federal Form 1040 and any 
accompanying federal schedules.


--- Page 12 ---

Page 4 of 43
2024 Montana Form 2 Instructions
Include only the pages of Form 2 on which you 
entered information. For example, if you are a 
resident and you only had to complete Form 2 
and Schedule I, only send pages 1, 2, and 3, 
along with your federal Form 1040 and any 
accompanying federal schedules.
Assembling Your Paper Return
From Top to Bottom
1.	Payment Voucher if you are making a 
payment
2.	Forms W-2 and 1099 reporting Montana 
Withholding
3.	Montana Form 2, pages 1 and 2
4.	Applicable Montana schedules and forms
5.	Copy of your federal tax return
6.	Copy of your federal schedules
Please
Do Not Use Staples 6
1
2
3
4
5
Payment with 
Voucher
(if applicable)
W-2s and 1099s
Form 2,
Form 2,
Pages 1 and 2
Completed Schedules
Copy of federal return
Copy of federal schedules
If you choose not to file electronically, we have 
two different mailing addresses for your paper 
return. We do this so that if you are asking for a 
refund, we can get your refund processed and to 
you more quickly and efficiently.
If you do not owe taxes or are expecting a refund, 
mail your tax return to:
Montana Department of Revenue
PO Box 6577
Helena, MT 59604-6577
If you are making a payment with your tax return, 
mail your tax return and check to:
Montana Department of Revenue
PO Box 6308
Helena, MT 59604-6308
Amending Your 2024 Return
If you are amending your 2024 return, you must 
complete a new Form 2 with all the schedules, 
even if none of the amounts previously reported 
on them have changed, and do the following:
1.	Mark the Amended box on the top left of 
page 1.
2.	Make sure you sign and date your return.
3.	Complete Schedule V, Amended Return 
Information.
4.	Include any payments made with or after 
filing the original return on page 1, line 18.
5.	Include any previous overpayment or refund 
received on page 1, line 20.
Important: If you file an amended tax return that 
reflects an increased tax liability, you may have the 
late payment penalty waived. To receive the waiver, 
simply mark the “Amended Return” box on the 
top left-hand corner of the tax return and pay the 
tax and applicable interest in full when you file the 
amended return. By marking this box and paying 
all tax and interest, you are treated as having 
requested a waiver of the late payment penalty.
If the Internal Revenue Service changes or 
makes corrections to your federal Form 1040, 
you must amend your return within 180 days 
of the final determination date. The final 
determination date is the date in which all 
appeal rights have been waived or exhausted, 
by agreement, or, if appealed, by a final decision 
with respect to which all appeal rights have been 
waived. If you amend your federal return, you will 
need to amend your Form 2 within 180 days of 
filing your amended federal tax return.
Interest Rate for 2025
Effective January 1, 2025, the annual interest 
rate assessed on outstanding balances is 
8 percent. This rate also applies to interest on 
the underpayment of estimated taxes. Interest is 
calculated daily.


--- Page 13 ---

Page 5 of 43
2024 Montana Form 2 Instructions
Line Instructions
Personal Information
Enter your name, address, and Social Security 
Number (SSN) or Individual Tax Identification 
Number (ITIN). An incorrect number may delay 
your refund.
Enter the address where you receive your mail. 
We will use this address to send correspondence 
and your refund (if applicable).
If either the primary taxpayer or the spouse died 
prior to filing this return, mark the Deceased box 
next to his or her name.
You must use the same filing status used on your 
federal tax return. Select the filing status you use on 
your federal Form 1040. If you do not have a federal 
filing requirement, use the filing status that you would 
use if you had a federal filing requirement.
If you are using the married filing separately 
status, mark the box for Married Filing Separately 
enter your spouse’s SSN in the space for the 
spouse’s SSN.
Residency Status
Your Montana income tax liability depends on 
your residency status.
Montana has three residency statuses:
	
●Resident
	
●Part-Year Resident
	
●Nonresident
Important: If you are a Montana resident filing 
jointly with a nonresident spouse, all of your 
income is taxable to Montana. Only your 
nonresident or part-year resident spouse’s 
Montana source income is taxable to Montana. 
You must mark the Part-year Resident box 
and complete Schedule II, Tax on Montana 
Source Income, to report your income and your 
nonresident or part-year resident spouse’s 
Montana source income and to figure your 
Montana tax liability. See the instructions for 
Schedule II later.
Resident
Mark the Resident box if you are a full-year 
Montana resident (unless you are filing jointly 
with a nonresident or part-year resident spouse. 
See instructions later).
You are a Montana resident if you are domiciled or 
maintain a permanent place of abode in Montana. 
Montana taxes all of a resident’s income, even if 
that income is earned out-of-state.
There are a variety of factors when determining 
whether a person is domiciled or maintains a 
permanent place of abode in Montana.
These include, but are not limited to:
	
●having a Montana driver’s license
	
●having a Montana ID card
	
●voting in or registering to vote in Montana
	
●having a Montana resident hunting or 
fishing license
	
●claiming Montana residency when applying 
for admission or financial aid at a Montana 
college or university
	
●receiving services from a program 
administered by the Montana Department of 
Public Health and Human Services, which is 
only available to Montana residents
	
●having a concealed weapon permit in Montana
	
●claiming Montana residency for tax purposes 
in prior or current years
	
●where an individual registers a motor vehicle
	
●where an individual owns, rents, or occupies a 
developed real estate property, a mobile home, 
or a recreational vehicle with sleeping and 
cooking arrangements, during the tax period
	
●where the individual regularly receives mail
	
●the location of an individual’s principal place 
of business, profession, or occupation
	
●where an individual’s professional licenses 
were issued and used during the tax year
	
●where an individual obtains professional, 
financial, or healthcare services on a regular 
basis including, but not limited to, legal 
advice, accounting advice, dental care, or 
primary healthcare
	
●where an individual attends or is a member 
of a place of worship
	
●the location of any social, fraternal, athletic 
organizations, clubs, or lodges in which the 
individual is a member
This is not a complete list and a person does 
not need to meet all of the factors listed to 
be considered a resident. Each individual’s 
circumstances and intentions are considered 
when determining residency.


--- Page 14 ---

Page 6 of 43
2024 Montana Form 2 Instructions
If an individual maintains a place of abode in 
both Montana and another state, and both 
show similar permanency characteristics, the 
department may look at whether the individual 
has abandoned residency of one state in favor of 
another state through affirmative actions.
Example: Jim works in Wyoming for 11 months 
out of the year. However, Jim owns a home in 
Montana, is registered to vote in Montana, holds 
Montana resident hunting and fishing licenses, 
and holds a Montana driver’s license. These are 
all indications that he is a Montana resident. As a 
result, all of Jim’s income, even what he earned 
in Wyoming, is taxable on his Montana tax return.
Part-Year Resident
Mark the Part-year Resident box if you are a part-
year resident of Montana or if you are a Montana 
resident filing jointly with a nonresident or part-
year resident spouse.
You are a part-year resident of Montana if you either:
	
●were a Montana resident at the start of 
the year and then established residency in 
another state during the year.
	
●were a nonresident at the start of the year 
and then established residency in Montana 
during the year.
Part-year residents must file an income tax return 
as a part-year resident and use the Schedule II 
to determine their Montana tax liability. Montana 
taxes the income that a part-year resident receives 
while living in Montana plus any income received 
from Montana sources when not living in Montana.
Example: Pam lived in Montana for four months 
of the year, then moved to Pennsylvania. The 
income she earned during those four months 
is considered Montana source income and is 
taxable in Montana.
The following individuals are examples of who 
would not be considered part-year residents:
	
●retirees (commonly referred to as “snowbirds”) 
who are residents of Montana but live in 
another state for a portion of each year.
	
●a resident of another state who works in 
Montana on a seasonal basis but does not 
establish residency in Montana
	
●a Montana resident attending an out-of-state 
college who has not established residency 
elsewhere
Nonresident
You are a nonresident of Montana if you are 
neither a resident of Montana nor a part-
year resident. Generally, Montana taxes a 
nonresident’s income from all Montana sources.
Example: If you lived and worked in California from 
January to August of the year, then worked remotely 
in Montana for the rest of the year, your wages 
earned while working in Montana are considered 
Montana source income. These wages are subject to 
tax, even though you are a nonresident.
North Dakota Reciprocity
Montana has an income tax reciprocity agreement 
with the state of North Dakota that allows a resident 
of one state to be exempt from wage withholding 
and individual income tax on compensation 
received for work performed in the other state.
If you are a resident of North Dakota, wages you 
received in 2024 for work performed in Montana 
are not taxable in Montana. The following 
instructions are for residents of North Dakota 
whose income from Montana is only wages.
If your employer withheld Montana income tax, 
you must complete Form 2, pages 1 and 2, to 
request the refund as follows:
1.	Complete the personal information section 
at the top of page 1, as instructed.
2.	Mark the box for “Nonresident.”
3.	Mark the box for “North Dakota Reciprocity.”
4.	Complete page 1, lines 1 through 3 and 7. 
Report your Montana wage withholding on 
lines 11a and 11. Then, enter this amount 
on lines 21, 23, and 26.
5.	File your form with a copy of your federal 
return and Form(s) W-2 showing Montana 
income tax withholding.
If you received wages and other types of income 
from Montana, you must complete Form 2 
following the instructions. See the Schedule II 
instructions for the treatment of your wages.
If you do not want your employer to withhold 
Montana income tax from your wages, you 
must claim the North Dakota reciprocity 
exemption on Montana Form MW-4 and give 
that form to your employer.


--- Page 15 ---

Page 7 of 43
2024 Montana Form 2 Instructions
Page 1
Lines 1 through 3. If you do not have a federal 
filing requirement but must file a Montana return 
because you are required to report a Montana 
addition or subtraction, complete lines 1 through 3 
with any amounts that would be reported on those 
lines as if you were required to file the Form 1040. 
See federal Form 1040 for what is included in 
federal adjusted gross income.
Line 1 - Federal adjusted gross income. Your 
income on your Montana tax return begins with 
your federal adjusted gross income as reported 
on your Form 1040, line 11. You must include 
your federal Form 1040 with your return unless 
you did not have a federal filing requirement.
Line 2 – Federal standard deduction or adjusted 
federal itemized deductions. You must use the 
same type of deduction taken on your federal return 
to determine Montana taxable income.
If you took the standard deduction on your 
Form 1040, enter the amount from your 
Form 1040, line 12. Also use the standard 
deduction for your filing status if you did not have 
a federal filing requirement.
If you itemized your deductions, you must 
remove any state income taxes taken as an 
itemized deduction only to the extent that it does 
not reduce your deduction below your federal 
standard deduction. Use Worksheet A (Adjusted 
Federal Itemized Deductions Worksheet) to 
determine the amount to report on this line.
Worksheet A – Adjusted Federal Itemized Deductions Worksheet
Do not use this worksheet if you took the federal 
standard deduction.
1 Enter your total federal 
itemized deductions from 
Form 1040, line 12


1
2 Enter the amount of state 
income tax deduction included 
on Form 1040, Schedule A


2
3 Subtract line 2 from line 1. 
(See instructions)

3
4 Enter the standard deduction 
for your federal filing status

4
5 Enter the greater of line 3 or line 
4 here and on page 1, line 2. 

5
Worksheet A, line 3. If you are married filing 
separately and itemized your deductions because 
your spouse also itemized deductions, you must 
subtract all of your state income tax deduction 
from your federal itemized deductions. If you are 
using the married filing separately status, report 
Worksheet A, line 3 on Form 2, line 2.
Important: Do not include the federal qualified 
business income deduction to determine your 
federal taxable income for Montana purposes.
Line 3 – Federal taxable income for Montana. 
If zero or less, enter zero.
Line 4 – Montana additions to federal taxable 
income. Montana additions are all items of income 
that are not included in federal taxable income and 
that must be added to determine Montana taxable 
income. Enter the total of your Montana additions 
from Schedule I, Montana Adjustments Schedule, 
line 9. For information about additions, see the 
instructions for Schedule I.
Line 5 – Montana subtractions to federal taxable 
income. Montana subtractions are all items of 
income included in federal taxable income that are 
deducted to determine Montana taxable income. 
Subtractions to federal taxable income are reported 
on Schedule I. Enter the total of your Montana 
subtractions from Schedule I, Montana Adjustments 
Schedule, line 27. For information about subtractions 
see the instructions for Schedule I.
Line 6 - $5,500 subtraction for taxpayers 65 
and older. Taxpayers 65 and older receive a 
$5,500 subtraction from federal taxable income. 
If married filing jointly, and both are 65 and older, 
the subtraction is equal to $11,000. This amount 
is adjusted annually for inflation.
Line 7 – Montana taxable income. Your Montana 
taxable income cannot be less than zero. If zero or 
less, enter zero.
Line 8 – Tax liability before tax credits. The 
Montana tax liability is calculated on Form 2, 
page 2 on the Montana Individual Income Tax 
worksheet. For information about figuring your tax 
liability see the instructions for Montana Individual 
Income Tax Calculation Worksheet.


--- Page 16 ---

Page 8 of 43
2024 Montana Form 2 Instructions
Line 9 – Nonrefundable tax credits. Enter 
the total of your nonrefundable tax credits from 
Schedule III, Tax Credits, line 14. For information 
about nonrefundable tax credits, see the 
instructions for Schedule III.
Line 11 – Montana income tax withheld. Enter 
the total amount of Montana income tax withheld 
from each type of form you received.
11a – Form(s) W-2. If you received wages, the 
Montana tax withheld is reported in Box 17 of 
your federal Form W-2.
11b – Form(s) 1099. If you received pensions, 
retirement income, or IRA distributions, the 
Montana tax withheld is reported in Box 14 of 
your federal Form 1099-R.
If you received Montana mineral royalties, the tax 
withheld is generally reported in Box 16 of your 
federal Form 1099-MISC. Royalty payments made 
to owners of Montana mineral rights are subject 
to state tax withholding if certain thresholds are 
met. This amount is no more than 6 percent of 
your Montana royalty payments and should not be 
confused with the production taxes that are also 
subtracted from your royalty payments. Do not 
report any production taxes on this line.
11c – Total pass-through entity tax credit 
from Montana Schedule(s) K-1. Report the total 
amount of pass-through entity tax credit shown 
on the Montana Schedule(s) K-1 (PTE), Part V, 
line 1, you received from a pass-through entity.
Report the amount of pass-through entity tax 
shown on the Montana Schedule(s) K-1 (FID-3) you 
received from an estate or trust from Part V, line 4.
11d – Total withholding from Montana 
Schedule(s) K-1. Report the amount of 
withholding taxes shown on the Montana 
Schedule(s) K-1 (PTE) you received from a pass-
through entity. Combine the total pass-through 
withholding on Part V, line 3c, and the mineral 
royalty withholding reported on Part V, line 4 of the 
Montana Schedule K-1, and report the sum here.
Report the amount of withholding taxes shown 
on the Montana Schedule(s) K-1 (FID-3) you 
received from an estate or trust. Combine the 
total withholding on Part V, lines 1 through 3, and 
report the sum here.
11e – Loan-out withholding from Form 
LOWCERT. If you are an employee or owner of a 
loan-out company, report the amount of loan-out 
withholding from Form LOWCERT.
Line 12 – 2024 estimated tax payments. If you 
made estimated income tax payments for tax 
year 2024, enter the amount of these estimated 
tax payments, including any payment you made 
before April 15, 2025.
Line 13 – Overpayment applied from 
2023 return. Report the amount of the 2023 
overpayment that you requested us to apply to 
your 2024 estimated income tax payments. Do 
not include in this total any income taxes paid for 
a previous year since these are not estimated 
taxes paid for tax year 2024. You can view your 
payment history on our TransAction Portal (TAP), 
at https://tap.dor.mt.gov.
Line 14 – Extension payments. You receive 
an automatic extension to file your 2024 Form 2. 
However, you may still make an extension 
payment. Use this line to report any payment you 
make on or after April 15, 2025, for tax year 2024 
if you file your return on or after the original due 
date but before the extended due date.
Line 15 – Montana earned income tax credit. 
You are allowed a Montana earned income tax 
credit (EITC) of 10 percent of the federal EITC 
claimed on your federal return. Your Montana 
EITC is refundable. This means that if the credit 
is more than your Montana tax liability after 
applying withholding taxes and credits, the 
difference will be refunded to you.
Nonresidents do not qualify for the Montana EITC. 
If you are a nonresident, leave this line blank.
Enter your federal earned income tax credit from 
your federal Form 1040, page 2, line 27. Multiply 
this amount by 10 percent (0.10) ONLY if you are 
a full-year resident and you are not:
	
●An enrolled tribal member living on the 
reservation of your tribe; or
	
●A member of an agricultural organization 
provided for in section 501(d) of the Internal 
Revenue Code
If you are a part-year resident, an enrolled tribal 
member living on the reservation of your tribe, a 
member of an agricultural organization provided 
for in section 501(d) of the Internal Revenue Code, 


--- Page 17 ---

Page 9 of 43
2024 Montana Form 2 Instructions
or a resident active duty servicemember, you 
are allowed the Montana EITC in the proportion 
of your Montana earned income over your total 
earned income. Use the Montana EITC Reduction 
Worksheet to calculate your Montana EITC.
On this worksheet, Montana earned income 
means the following:
	
●If you are a part-year resident, earned 
income used for the calculation of the federal 
EITC that was earned in Montana while you 
were a resident. In general, Montana earned 
income is the addition of all income reported 
on Schedule II, lines 1, 6, and 11. Earned 
income sourced to Montana while you 
were not a resident is not Montana earned 
income. See Example 1.
	
●If you are an enrolled tribal member living 
on the reservation of your tribe, earned 
income is the amount received for services 
performed outside the reservation. Use 
Form ETM to calculate your Montana earned 
income. See Example 2.
	
●If you are a member of an agricultural 
organization provided for in section 501(d) 
of the Internal Revenue Code, your Montana 
earned income is your federal earned 
income minus any dividends received from 
the agricultural organization that are included 
in the federal earned income used to 
calculate the federal EITC. See Example 3.
	
●If you are a resident active duty military 
servicemember, the amount of earned 
income that is not exempt from individual 
income tax in Montana. See Example 4.
Worksheet B - Montana EITC Reduction Worksheet
1

Enter the federal EITC reported 
on Form 1040, line 27

1
2 Multiply line 1 by 10% (0.10)
2
3
 Enter your federal earned income 
used to calculate the federal EITC

3
4
 Enter your Montana earned 
income

4
5 Divide line 4 by line 3
5
6

Multiply line 2 by line 5.
Report on Form 2, page 1, line 15.
	
This is your Montana EITC.


6
Example 1: Part-year Resident. You are a 
part-year resident who received $30,000 
of earned income including $15,000 of 
wages in Montana as a resident and 
$5,000 of wages as a nonresident, and 
another $10,000 of wages in another state. 
Your Montana earned income is $15,000. 
Assume your federal EITC is $2,000. Your 
Montana EITC before reduction is $200 
(10 percent of your federal EITC). Your 
Montana EITC after reduction is $100 
($200 x ($15,000 / $30,000)).
Example 2: Enrolled Tribal Member. 
You are an enrolled member of a tribe 
living on the reservation of your tribe 
in Montana. You received $30,000 of 
earned income including: $10,000 of 
wages earned while working outside 
the reservation, and another $20,000 
earned on your reservation. Your 
Montana earned income is $10,000. 
Assume your federal EITC is $1,500. 
Your Montana EITC before reduction is 
$150 (10 percent of your federal EITC). 
Your Montana EITC after reduction is $50 
($150 x ($10,000 / $30,000)).
Example 3: Member of a 501(d) Organization. 
You are a member of an agricultural 
organization provided for in section 501(d) 
of the Internal Revenue Code. You received 
$25,000 of earned income. On your federal 
Form 1040, you included $10,000 of 
dividends received from the agricultural 
organization as earned income for the 
purpose of determining your federal earned 
income. Your Montana earned income is 
$15,000. Assume your federal EITC is 
$2,000. Your Montana EITC before reduction 
is $200 (10 percent of your federal EITC). 
Your Montana EITC after reduction is $120 
($200 x ($15,000/$25,000)).
Example 4: Resident Active Duty 
Servicemember. You are a Montana resident 
active duty servicemember filing jointly with 
your resident spouse. Your federal earned 
income is $45,000, $40,000 is your military 
salary and $5,000 is your spouse’s earned 
income. Your military compensation is 
exempt from taxation in Montana, but your 


--- Page 18 ---

Page 10 of 43
2024 Montana Form 2 Instructions
spouse’s income is not. Assume your federal 
EITC is $4,000. Your Montana EITC before 
reduction is $400 (10 percent of your federal 
EITC). Your Montana EITC after reduction is 
$45 ($400 x ($5,000/$45,000)).
Line 16 – Elderly Homeowner/Renter Credit. 
The Montana Elderly Homeowner/Renter Credit 
is a property tax relief program that provides a 
refundable tax credit of up to $1,150. To claim 
this credit, you must live in a household where 
the total income of all its members is less than 
$45,000 for that year, be 62 or older, have lived 
in Montana for more than nine months during the 
tax year, and occupied a Montana residence as a 
renter, owner, or lessee for a total of six months 
or more during the year.
To calculate the amount of the credit to report 
on this line, you must complete Schedule 2EC, 
Elderly Homeowner/Renter Credit. Attach 
Schedule 2EC to your return if you claim this 
credit. See the instructions for Schedule 2EC for 
more information.
Line 17 – Refundable tax credits. This line 
consists of the refundable tax credits reported on 
Schedule III, lines 15 and 16. Attach Schedule III to 
your form if you claim any of these credits. See the 
instructions for Schedule III for more information.
Line 18 – If filing an amended return, 
payments made with original return. Enter 
any payments made when you filed your original 
return and any subsequent payments that were 
applied to your 2024 tax liability.
Line 19–Contributions, Penalties, Interest, 
and Other Taxes. This line is used to report 
any contributions, penalties, interest, and other 
taxes from Schedule IV, Contributions, Penalties, 
Interest, and Other Taxes. Complete this schedule 
and attach it to your form if you are:
	
●Making one or more contributions to a 
voluntary check-off program
	
○Nongame Wildlife Program
	
○Child Abuse Prevention Program
	
○Agriculture Literacy in Montana Schools 
Program
	
○Montana Military Family Relief Funds 
Program
	
●Reporting interest, late filing or payment 
penalties, or penalties related to savings and 
management accounts
	
●Reporting lump sum taxes or any of the 
following recapture taxes
	
○Biodiesel Credit
	
○Endowment Credit
	
○Family Education Savings Account
	
○Montana ABLE Account
	
○Trades Education and Training Credit
See the instructions for Schedule IV for more 
information.
Line 20–If filing an amended return, enter 
overpayments already refunded or applied 
to tax year 2025. If you are filing an amended 
return and you had an overpayment on your 
original tax year 2024 return, or on the last 
amended return filed for 2024 if this is not your 
first amendment, report this overpayment here. 
You may have chosen to apply this overpayment 
to your tax year 2025 estimated taxes.
Line 22 – Tax due. If your payments on line 21 
are less than your tax liability on line 10, subtract 
your payments from your tax liability and enter 
the result on line 22. This is the amount you owe. 
You can pay the amount you owe by:
	
●electronic funds withdrawal when e-filing 
return. You can schedule your withdrawal for 
a later date.
	
●e-check or credit/debit card on our 
TransAction Portal at https://tap.dor.mt.gov. 
There is a fee when paying with a credit or 
debit card.
	
●personal check, money order, or cashier’s 
check. Include the payment voucher 
available at MTRevenue.gov. Make your 
check payable to the Montana Department 
of Revenue, sign your check, and write your 
Social Security Number and “tax year 2024” 
on the memo line.
Note: If the payment is not in U.S. funds, the 
bank will convert the payment to U.S. funds 
based on an exchange rate, potentially reducing 
the amount credited to your tax account.
Interest and late payment penalties will be 
assessed on any amount not paid when due.
If you cannot pay the entire amount that you owe 
with your tax return, we encourage you to file 


--- Page 19 ---

Page 11 of 43
2024 Montana Form 2 Instructions
your return on time and pay as much as possible. 
By filing and paying as much as you can by 
April 15, 2025, you may not have to pay a late 
filing penalty and you can reduce the amount of 
your late payment penalty and interest. If you need 
to establish a payment plan, visit our TransAction 
Portal at https://tap.dor.mt.gov or call us at 
(406) 444-6964, as soon as possible to discuss 
your options and make payment arrangements.
Line 23–Overpaid tax. If your payments on 
line 21 are more than your tax liability on line 10, 
this is your overpayment. You may apply this 
amount to any contributions, penalties, interest, 
and/or your 2025 estimated taxes. You may also 
designate an amount of your overpaid tax to a 
529 or 529A (ABLE) account.
Line 24 – Amount applied to your 2025 estimated 
taxes. This is the amount from your overpaid tax 
you want applied to your 2025 estimated taxes. 
The amount you carry forward to your 2025 return 
is applied to your first tax year 2025 estimated tax 
installment payment. See Publication 1, Prepaying 
Income Tax, for further information on your obligation 
to prepay income tax.
Line 25 – 529/529A deposit. If you want all or 
part of your refund deposited into a 529 Qualified 
Tuition Program (Family Education Savings 
Account) or a 529A (Achieving a Better Life 
Experience (ABLE)) savings account, complete 
the 529/529A Direct Deposit Information section 
in the Direct Deposit section. Your deposit must 
be more than $25 per account.
Line 26 - Refund. This is your refund. This 
amount cannot be less than zero.
Montana Individual Income Tax Calculation
Complete lines 1 through 12 to determine your 
Montana tax liability, which consists of the 
Montana Ordinary Income Tax and the Montana 
Net Long-Term Capital Gains Tax. If you are 
a resident, the amount on line 13 is your tax 
liability. Nonresidents, part-year residents, and 
Montana residents filing jointly with a nonresident 
or part-year resident spouse complete lines 1 
through 12, then use the Net Long-Term Capital 
Gains Tax on line 11 and the Montana Ordinary 
Income Tax to figure the total Montana tax liability 
on Schedule II, Tax on Montana Source Income.
The tax rates are on page 14.
Montana Ordinary Income is defined as all taxable 
income that is not considered a net long-term 
capital gain and includes qualified dividends.
A net long-term capital gain is the net gain from 
the sale or exchange of a capital asset held for 
more than one year, if and to the extent such 
gain is used in computing your gross income. 
Examples of net long-term capital gains include 
the proceeds from the sale of stocks, bonds, or 
real estate owned for more than one year.
Net long-term capital gains are taxed at two rates 
unless Montana Ordinary Income is greater than 
the amount for the filing status.
To figure your net long-term capital gains tax, 
calculate your total Montana Ordinary Income by 
subtracting your net long-term capital gains from 
your total Montana taxable income reported on 
page 1, line 7. Use this amount to determine the 
rate for your net long-term capital gain, up to the 
top of the first bracket of 3 percent. The portion of 
your long-term capital gain that exceeds the first 
bracket will be taxed at 4.1 percent.
For Montana Ordinary Income above the 
amounts below, all net long-term capital gains are 
taxed at 4.1 percent.
Filing Status
Montana Ordinary Income
Single and married filing separately
$20,500
Married filing jointly and qualifying 
surviving spouses

$41,000
Head of household
$30,750
Line 1. Enter the amount of taxable income from 
page 1, line 7. If you do not have a net long-term 
capital gain, skip lines 2 through 10, and enter 
0 on line 11. Use the Ordinary Income Tax Table 
on Page 14 to determine your Montana Ordinary 
Income Tax that is reported on line 12.
Line 2 – Net long-term capital gains. Enter 
the net long-term capital gains that are subject 
to the federal net long-term capital gains tax. 
Generally, this amount is the lesser of federal 
Schedule D, line 15 or Schedule D, line 16. If you 
are not required to file a Schedule D because you 
meet the exception to file a federal Schedule D, 
report the amount on your Form 1040, line 7. You 
meet the exception to file a federal Schedule D if 
you are not deferring any capital gain by investing in 
a qualified opportunity fund and you have no capital 
losses; your only capital gains are capital gain 
