--- Page 39 ---

Page 31 of 43
2024 Montana Form 2 Instructions
a statement detailing how much credit should be 
taken from each CGR account. If you do not know 
your CGR Account ID, call us at (406) 444-6900 
and we will provide it to you.
Line 9 – Historic Property Preservation Credit. 
You can claim a credit against your income 
tax liability for your own qualified rehabilitation 
expenditures. The allowable Montana credit is 
25 percent of the federal rehabilitation credit 
provided for in Internal Revenue Code 47(a)(2). 
When you claim this credit, include a copy of 
your federal Form 3468 with your tax return. If 
the federal credit was transferred to you, the 
owner who transferred it, not you, must claim the 
Montana credit.
Line 10 –Infrastructure User Fee Credit. You can 
claim a credit against your income tax liability for 
the fees attributable to the use of the infrastructure.
Your credit is the total of the interest and principal 
paid as reported in the letter from the Montana 
Board of Investments.
When you claim this credit, include a copy of the 
letter from the Montana Board of Investments 
detailing the principal and interest paid. You can 
carry back three years or carry forward seven years 
any of your unused Infrastructure User Fee Credit.
For further instructions on the Infrastructure 
User Fee Credit, and to calculate the credit, see 
Montana Form IUFC. When you claim this credit, 
include a copy of Form IUFC with your tax return.
Line 11–Media Credit. You may claim the Media 
Credit against your income tax liability if you 
received a validation letter from the Department 
of Revenue with your approved Media Credit 
amount, or a Form MEDIA CLAIM with your 
Montana Schedule K-1 from a pass-through 
entity, estate, or trust. You may also claim the 
Media Credit if you received the credit via a 
registered transfer. Enter the UCRN found in 
your validation letter. The Media Credit may be 
carried forward up to five years from the date 
of issuance. The UCRN indicates the years 
in which the credit can be claimed. If you are 
claiming the Media Credit, you must submit Form 
MEDIA CLAIM with your tax return. Please see 
Form MEDIA CLAIM and its instructions for the 
submission process.
Line 12–Jobs Growth Incentive Credit. Qualifying 
employers in Montana that create qualifying 
net employee growth in Montana beginning in 
tax year 2022 and through tax year 2028 can 
claim a tax credit that is equal to half of the eligible 
employer’s taxes paid under Federal Insurance 
Contributions Act (FICA) for qualifying new 
employees. While the credit is nonrefundable, 
it may be carried forward for up to 10 years. 
Employers may apply to the Montana Department 
of Labor and Industry to claim the credit.
For further instructions on the Jobs Growth Incentive 
Credit, and to calculate this credit, see Montana 
Form JGI. When you claim this credit, include a copy 
of Form JGI with your tax return and report the credit 
certificate number found in your Credit Certificate 
from Montana Department of Labor and Industry.
Line 13- Carryforward amount from an expired 
or repealed tax credit. Report the code and 
carryforward amount you may have from a tax 
credit that was repealed. If you are claiming a 
carryforward, include a detailed statement of the 
credit carryforward with your tax return. If you are 
claiming a carryforward for more than one credit, 
report the total of the amount of all credits on 
line 13 and include a detailed statement for each 
credit you are claiming.
Biodiesel Blending and Storage Credit 
– Code: BBSC. This credit was repealed
beginning in tax year 2022. You may carry this
credit forward for up to seven years from the
first year it was claimed.
Increasing Research Activities Credit 
– Code: IRAC. This credit expired on
December 31, 2010, and can be carried
forward for up to 15 years.
Geothermal Systems Credit – Code: GEOT. 
This credit was repealed beginning in 
tax year 2022. You may carry this credit 
forward for up to seven years.
Alternative Energy Systems Credit – Code: 
AESC. This credit was repealed beginning in 
tax year 2022. It may be carried forward for 
up to four years.
Alternative Energy Production Credit – Code: 
AEPC. This credit was repealed beginning in 
tax year 2022. It may be carried forward for up 
to seven years.


--- Page 40 ---

Page 32 of 43
2024 Montana Form 2 Instructions
Dependent Care Assistance Credit – Code: 
DCAC. This credit was repealed beginning in 
tax year 2022. It may be carried forward for up 
to five years.
Empowerment Zone Credit – Code: EMPZ. 
This credit was repealed beginning in 
tax year 2022. It may be carried forward for 
up to seven years.
Adoption Credit – Code: ADPT. Enter the 
amount of any carryforward from the Adoption 
Credit that was available before January 1, 2022. 
It may be carried forward for up to five years.
Mineral and Coal Exploration Credit – 
Code: MINE. This credit was repealed 
beginning in tax year 2022. It may be carried 
forward for up to fifteen years.
Refundable Credits
Refundable credits reduce your tax to zero and 
any excess is refunded to you.
Line 15 –Adoption Credit. Montana residents 
that complete an adoption may be eligible for the 
Montana adoption credit. The credit is equal to 
$7,500 for the adoption of a child in the Montana 
foster care system and $5,000 for any other child 
under the age of 18 or person who is physically 
or mentally incapable of providing self-care. You 
must include Form ADPT with your return to 
claim this credit. In addition, you must include 
the paperwork documenting the adoption. For 
foster care adoptions, include a copy of the 
signed adoption confirmation letter sent to you 
by Montana Department of Health and Human 
Services (DPHHS).
Line 16–Unlocking Public Lands Credit. 
The Unlocking Public Lands Program allows a 
landowner to enter into a contractual agreement 
with the Montana Department of Fish, Wildlife 
and Parks to provide public recreational access 
where no legal public access currently exists.
The landowner may receive an annual tax credit 
in the amount of $750 per agreement (up to 
a maximum of $3,000 tax credit per year) for 
allowing such access. For additional information, 
refer to fwp.mt.gov.
Part II – Credit for Income Taxes Paid to 
Another State or Country
If you are a full-year or part-year resident and 
paid income tax to another state or country, you 
may be able to claim this nonrefundable credit 
to offset the amount of income tax paid to the 
other state or country if that income is considered 
taxable to Montana.
Because Montana has two tax tables, one for 
Montana ordinary income (income not considered 
a net long-term capital gain) and another for net 
long-term capital gains, the credit for income 
taxes paid to another state must be calculated 
separately for each type of income. The first 
section of Part II is to calculate your credit for 
income taxes paid to another state for income 
that is not a net long-term capital gain. The 
second section is used to calculate the credit for 
income taxes paid on net long-term capital gains. 
For each income type, you will use a ratio of the 
income type taxed in both states over your total 
sourced and taxable income to determine the 
amount of credit attributable to each income type.
Important: You cannot claim this credit if the other 
state or country in which you filed an income tax 
return has allowed you a credit against the taxes 
that they have imposed on your net income, 
because you are also subject to income tax on the 
same income in Montana. Additionally, the income 
must be derived from within the other state or 
country that is imposing the income tax. Income 
taxes paid to another state or country on income 
that is derived from sources within Montana do not 
qualify for this credit.
Owners of a pass-through entity (S corporation 
or partnership). If you are an owner of a pass-
through entity and your entity pays an income 
tax to another state (including composite tax or a 
pass-through entity tax) or country, you can claim 
a credit for your share of these income taxes 
paid by the entity. The income tax paid by the S 
corporation or partnership must be measured by 
and imposed on net income.
The credit cannot be claimed for taxes paid by 
your pass-through entity that are not measured 
by and imposed on net income, such as franchise 
or license taxes or fees that are not measured by 
and imposed on net income, gross receipts taxes, 
or gross sales taxes.


--- Page 41 ---

Page 33 of 43
2024 Montana Form 2 Instructions
If your pass-through entity paid an entity level 
tax in another state and took a federal expense 
deduction for that tax, you must report your 
pro-rata share of that deduction on Schedule I, 
Part I, line 4. This is required whether or not 
the taxes paid by your pass-through entity are 
considered a separately stated or non-separately 
stated deduction on your federal Schedule K-1.
Sourced and taxable. In the following 
instructions, sourced and taxable means any 
income that must be reported to another state 
or foreign country in accordance with the other 
state’s or country’s rules, and that is not subject 
to an exemption in Montana or in that other state 
or country. If the income is partially exempt, only 
the part that is nonexempt can be used for the 
calculation of this credit. Generally, income that 
is sourced and taxable to another state is found 
on the line after state-specific additions and 
subtractions to federal gross income.
Taxes paid to another country. Individuals 
are not entitled to this credit when they claim a 
federal Foreign Tax Credit in the same year. For 
example, if you received Canada source income, 
you paid income tax to Canada, and claimed 
the federal foreign tax credit on Form 1116, then 
you cannot claim any foreign tax credit on your 
Montana return.
You can claim a Montana credit for income taxes 
paid to another country if you claimed the foreign 
taxes as an itemized deduction.
You cannot claim if:
	
●the foreign country allows a credit for taxes 
paid to Montana.
	
●you reported this year’s foreign income and 
taxes on the Form 1116 for the federal foreign 
tax credit.
Montana Ordinary Income Tax
Line 1. Enter your income sourced and taxable 
to another state that is also included in your 
Montana ordinary taxable income. Do not include 
any income that is not taxable in Montana. 
For example, if you are a resident military 
servicemember, do not include your salary for 
your active duty service in this amount.
Line 2. Enter all income that is sourced and 
taxable to the other state or country, including your 
net long-term capital gains. See the instructions 
about sourced and taxable income above to find 
the appropriate amount to report here.
Line 3. Full-year residents must complete 
lines 3a and 3b to calculate the appropriate amount 
of income that is used to calculate the credit.
Line 3a. Enter your total income from Form 1040, 
line 9. This is your income that does not include 
any federal adjustments.
Line 3b. Enter those deductions directly related 
to the production of your total income. Generally, 
these are amounts that are directly related to 
the production of business income. An example 
would be federal self-employment tax. Voluntary 
expenses, such as contributions to a health 
savings account or contributions to an IRA, are 
not considered directly related to the production 
of income and are not reportable on this line.
Line 4. Enter the actual tax liability paid by you or 
on your behalf to the other state or country. This 
amount comes from either an individual income tax 
return you filed, or a pass-through entity return filed 
on your behalf by a partnership or S corporation.
Do not include any penalties and interest paid to 
the other state or country.
Line 5. Residents enter your Montana ordinary 
income tax from page 2, line 12. Part-year 
residents enter your Montana source ordinary 
income tax from Schedule II, line 20.
Do not include any amounts reportable on 
Schedule IV, line 7.
Line 6. This amount represents the proportion of 
tax paid to the other state or country on only your 
Montana ordinary income.
Montana Net Long-Term Capital Gains Tax
Line 11. Enter your net long-term capital gains 
sourced and taxable to another state that is also 
included in your Montana net long-term capital 
gain. Do not include any amounts not considered 
a net long-term capital gain.
Line 12. Enter all income that is sourced and 
taxable to the other state or country, including your 
Montana ordinary income. See the instructions 
about sourced and taxable income on page 33 to 
find the appropriate amount to report here.


--- Page 42 ---

Page 34 of 43
2024 Montana Form 2 Instructions
Line 14. Enter the actual tax liability paid by you 
or on your behalf to the other state or country. 
This amount comes from either an individual 
income tax return you filed, or a pass-through 
entity return filed on your behalf by a partnership 
or S corporation.
Do not include any penalties and interest paid to 
the other state or country.
Line 15. Residents enter page 2, line 11. 
Part-year residents enter Schedule II, line 25.
Line 16. This amount represents the proportion 
of tax paid to the other state or country on only 
your net long-term capital gains.
Schedule IV – Contributions, 
Penalties, Interest, and Other 
Taxes
This schedule includes all the adjustments that 
reduce your overpayment, or increase your 
amount owed.
Line 1 – Voluntary contributions. Per Montana 
law, you can use your tax return to donate 
any amount to the following programs. Your 
contribution will increase the amount you owe or 
reduce the amount of your refund.
If you are amending your return, your original 
donations to voluntary contribution programs 
no longer apply. You can confirm or modify your 
contributions by marking one of the boxes or 
entering the dollar amount you wish to donate for 
any program you choose.
Line 1a – Nongame Wildlife Program. Your 
contributions to the program are used to ensure 
the well-being of Montana’s watchable wildlife 
species, such as eagles, herons, bluebirds, great 
horned owls, loons, chipmunks, pikas, flying 
squirrels, and painted turtles.
Line 1b – Child Abuse Prevention. Your 
contributions to this program funds services 
and activities to the prevention of child abuse 
and neglect.
Line 1c – Agriculture Literacy in Montana 
Schools. Your contributions to this program fund 
the development and presentation of educational 
programs. This program ensures Montana’s 
young people have a better understanding of 
agriculture in our state and how it relates to the 
rest of the world.
Line 1d – Montana Military Family Relief Fund. 
Your contributions to this program help provide 
funding for grants that aid Montana families in 
defraying the costs of food, housing, utilities, 
medical services, and other expenses when a wage 
earner has been called to active military duty.
Caution: The calculation of penalties and interest 
you report on your return is an approximation. 
The department may recalculate these amounts 
due to factors such as math errors, timing of 
payments, the date your return was received, 
etc. This adjustment may result in more or less 
penalties and interest owed.
Line 2 – Interest on Underpayment of Estimated 
Taxes. You must pay your income tax liability 
throughout the year. You can make your payments 
through employer withholding, installment payments 
of estimated taxes, or a combination of both. See 
Montana Publication 1 for information about paying 
income taxes in Montana.
If you do not pay at least 90 percent of your 2024 
income tax liability in advance after applying 
your credits or 100 percent of your 2023 income 
tax liability after applying your credits, you may 
have to pay interest on the underpayment of your 
estimated taxes with your return.
You do not have to make estimated tax payments 
if at least two-thirds of your gross income is 
derived from farming or ranching operations. 
Mark the “2/3 farming gross income” box if this 
applies to you.
Mark the “Estimated payments were made 
using the annualization method” box if you used 
Worksheet ESA (found in Publication 1) to make 
your estimated tax payments for 2024.
You can use Worksheet C, Underpayment of 
Estimated Tax Worksheet – Short Method, if your 
taxable year was 12 full months and one of the 
following conditions applies to you:
	
●You did not make estimated tax payments 
(in other words, your only payments were 
Montana income tax withholding); or
	
●You made four equal estimated payments by 
the required due dates.


--- Page 43 ---

Page 35 of 43
2024 Montana Form 2 Instructions
If you do not meet these criteria, you may complete 
Form EST-I (Underpayment of Estimated Tax by 
Individuals, Estates, and Trusts) to determine your 
interest on the underpayment of estimated tax or 
the department can figure it for you.
Line 3 – Late filing penalty. If you file your return 
after the extended due date (October 15), you 
are assessed a late filing penalty. The penalty 
is equal to 5 percent per month on the amount 
owed on October 15, up to 25 percent of 
that amount, until the return is filed. The minimum 
penalty is $50, even if you are claiming a refund.
If taxes and interest are paid within 30 days of the 
first Notice of Assessment sent by the department, 
the late filing penalty may be waived.
Line 4 – Late payment penalty. Tax paid after 
the due date, April 15, 2025, is subject to a late 
payment penalty equal to 0.5 percent per month, 
calculated daily, from April 15, 2025, until it is 
paid. The daily rate is 0.0164 percent. Your late 
payment penalty will never exceed 12 percent 
(24 months multiplied by 0.5 percent) of the 
Worksheet C - Underpayment of Estimated Tax Worksheet – Short Method
Part I. Required Annual Payment
1 2024 tax liability after nonrefundable credits 
1
2 Multiply line 1 by 90% (0.90)
2
3a 2024 total Montana income tax withholding 
3a
3b 2024 refundable tax credits 
3b
3c Overpayment applied from the 2023 return
3c
3 Add lines 3a through 3c. 
3
4
Subtract line 3 from line 1. If the result is less than $500, stop here; you do not 
owe interest on your underpayment of estimated tax.

4
5 2023 tax liability
5
6

Enter the lesser of line 2 or line 5. If the result is less than or equal to line 3, 
stop here; you do not owe interest on the underpayment of estimated tax.
	
This is your required annual payment.


6
Part II. Underpayment of Estimated Tax – Short Method
You can use this method if you did not make estimated tax payments or you made four equal 
estimated tax payments by the required due dates.
1
Estimated tax payments you made for tax year 2024. Do not include amounts 
applied from prior years. 

1
2 Add line 1 and Part I, line 3
2
3

Subtract line 2 from Part I, line 6. If the result is zero or less, stop here; you do 
not owe interest on the underpayment of your estimated tax.
	
This is your total underpayment for 2024. 


3
4 Multiply line 3 by 0.053041
4
5


If the amount on line 3 was paid on or after April 15, 2025, enter zero. If the 
amount on line 3 was paid before April 15, 2025, multiply the amount on line 3 
by the number of days the amount was paid before April 15, 2025. Then, 
multiply the result by 0.000219.



5
6
Subtract line 5 from line 4. Enter here and on Form 2, Schedule IV, line 2.
	
This is your interest on the underpayment of estimated tax.

6


--- Page 44 ---

Page 36 of 43
2024 Montana Form 2 Instructions
unpaid tax. Late payment penalty is automatically 
waived if you pay all the tax and interest with 
your return, or within 30 days of the first Notice of 
Assessment sent by the department.
Line 5 – Interest. If you do not pay 100 percent 
of your tax by April 15, 2025, you are assessed 
8 percent annual interest, computed daily on the 
amount you owe. Multiply your amount owed 
by 0.000219 for each day your payment is late. 
If you made payments after April 15, you must 
adjust the amount owed after each payment for 
the calculation of interest. Calculate the interest 
between each payment separately and add the 
interest owed for each period on this line.
Example: George owed $2,000 on April 15. 
He made a payment of $1,000 on June 14. He 
pays the remaining $1,000 with his return on 
October 15. George has two interest calculation 
periods. He must first calculate the interest for 60 
days based on $2,000. Then, he calculates the 
interest for 123 days based on $1,000.
Line 6 – Other penalties. Mark the box for the 
penalty you may owe and report the total of all 
penalties on line 6.
First-time Homebuyer Account. If you withdrew 
funds from your First-Time Homebuyer Account 
for purposes other than to pay for eligible costs 
for the purchase of a single-family residence, you 
must pay a 10 percent penalty on this withdrawal 
unless the withdrawal was made on the last 
business day of the year.
Medical Savings Account. If you withdrew funds 
from your Medical Savings Account for purposes 
other than to pay for eligible medical expenses, you 
must pay a 10 percent penalty on this withdrawal 
unless it was made on the last business day of 
the year. Multiply Schedule I, Part II, line 9, by 
10 percent (0.10) and enter the result here.
Farm and Ranch Risk Management Account. 
If you have not distributed your deposits 
and income from your Farm and Ranch Risk 
Management Account within three years, they 
are considered distributed and subject to a 10 
percent penalty. Multiply the amount that is 
considered distributed by 10 percent (0.10) and 
enter the result here.
Line 7 – Lump sum and recapture taxes. 
Report the total amount of lump sum tax and 
recapture taxes on this line.
Tax on Lump-Sum Distributions – Code: LS. 
If you qualify on your federal return for special 
averaging of your lump-sum distribution and have 
not included it as ordinary pension income in 
federal taxable income, you must pay Montana 
income tax on this distribution.
Your Montana tax liability on the lump-sum 
distribution is 10 percent of the federal tax 
calculated on federal Form 4972. Part-year 
residents must calculate the tax on all lump-sum 
distributions received while a resident of Montana. 
Include a copy of federal Form 4972.
Use code LS to report your lump sum tax.
Recapture taxes. Some Montana code sections 
that allow deductions and/or tax credits have 
provisions requiring a recapture of the tax benefit you 
received in an earlier year, if you do not meet certain 
requirements in succeeding tax years. All taxpayers, 
resident or not, can be subject to recapture tax.
If you must report a recapture, report the 
appropriate two-letter code and amount on this line.
The recapture taxes are:
Biodiesel/Bio-lubricant Production Facility, 
Biodiesel Blending and Storage, and Oilseed 
Crushing Credit Recapture Tax – Code: BD. 
If you previously claimed any of the tax 
credits for biodiesel blending or bio-lubricant 
production, biodiesel blending and storage, or 
oilseed crushing, and have ceased operations 
for a period of 12 consecutive months within 
five years of claiming the credit, the credit 
is subject to recapture. On this line, enter 
the amount of your Biodiesel/Bio-lubricant 
Production Facility, Biodiesel Blending and 
Storage, or Oilseed Crushing Recapture Tax 
and enter the code “BD” in the code box.
Endowment Credit Recapture Tax – 
Code: EC. If you previously claimed an 
Endowment Credit for a gift that you contributed 
to a qualified endowment and you now have 
received the gift back, you must recapture 
your income tax liability in a previous year. You 
must also include in your income any amounts 
that you previously deducted as an itemized 
deduction on a previous year’s tax return.


--- Page 45 ---

Page 37 of 43
2024 Montana Form 2 Instructions
On this line, enter the amount of your 
Endowment Credit Recapture Tax and enter the 
code “EC” in the space indicated. If, in addition 
to your recapture tax, part of the amount that 
is recaptured was claimed as a charitable 
contribution in a prior year, include in your 
income on the Schedule I, line 2, any recoveries 
of this prior-year deduction that reduced your tax 
liability in the year of that deduction.
Family Education Savings Account 
Recapture Tax – Code: FE. If you have a 
recapturable withdrawal from your Family 
Education Savings Account (529 plan), 
you must pay a 5.9 percent recapture tax 
on this withdrawal instead of including the 
withdrawal in your Montana taxable income.
A recapturable withdrawal is a withdrawal 
from your Family Education Savings Account 
within one year from the date you opened the 
account, or a withdrawal of contributions that 
reduced Montana taxable income in previous 
years that is not used to pay for qualified 
education expenses.
To determine the portion of withdrawal that 
reduced your Montana taxable income, 
you must:
1.	Take your total contributions divided by the 
total account balance before the withdrawal. 
This is your ratio.
2.	Multiply the amount of the withdrawal by 
the ratio. This is the amount of contribution 
included in the withdrawal.
3.	If the amount from step 2 is more than the 
contributions that have not been previously 
used to reduce Montana taxable income, 
the difference is subject to recapture tax.
Example: Brenda is the account owner of 
a Family Education Savings Account. The 
balance on the account is $20,000, including 
$12,000 of contributions that were previously 
claimed as deductions, $4,000 of the 
contributions did not reduce taxable income 
and $4,000 of earnings (20 percent of the 
total). Brenda makes a withdrawal of $10,000 
to pay for nonqualified education expenses. 
The recapturable withdrawal is $4,000 
($10,000 minus $2,000 of earnings minus 
$4,000 of contributions that did not reduce 
Montana taxable income previously).
Multiply your recapturable withdrawal by 
5.9 percent, enter the result on this line, and enter 
the code “FE” in the space. This is your Family 
Education Savings Account recapture tax.
Montana Achieving a Better Life Experience 
(ABLE) Recapture Tax – Code: AB. If you 
have a recapturable withdrawal from your 
Montana ABLE account, you must pay a 
5.9 percent recapture tax on this withdrawal 
instead of including this withdrawal in your 
Montana taxable income.
A recapturable withdrawal is a withdrawal 
from contributions that reduced Montana 
taxable income that is not used to pay for 
qualified disability expenses of the beneficiary 
of the account.
The portion of the withdrawal that is from 
contributions that reduced Montana taxable 
income is calculated the same way as for the 
Family Education Savings Plan.
Multiply your recapturable withdrawal by 5.9 
percent, enter the result on this line and enter 
the “AB” in the space indicated. This is your 
Montana ABLE recapture tax.
Trades Education and Training Credit 
Recapture Tax – Code: TE. If you previously 
claimed the trades education and training credit 
and recovered any of the expenses you paid, 
you must increase the amount of your tax by 
the amount of the credit that was previously 
taken. You must also include in income any 
amounts that you previously deducted as a 
business deduction on Schedule I, Part I, line 2.


--- Page 46 ---

Page 38 of 43
2024 Montana Form 2 Instructions
Schedule V – Amended 
Return Information
If you are amending your return, review the 
instructions on page 4 first. Then, complete this 
schedule when you amend your tax return.
You must file an amended tax return if:
	
●there is an error on your original return
	
●you make a change to your federal income 
tax return
	
●the IRS makes changes to your federal 
income tax return.
If the IRS made an adjustment to your return, 
you must file your amended Form 2 within 
180 days after receiving the notification of the 
change. Mark the “Federal audit” box. Include a 
copy of the adjustment notice when you file your 
amended Form 2.
If you amended your federal return, mark the 
“Amended federal return” box, and include a copy 
of your Form 1040X.
Mark the “Montana adjustment” box if you are 
only making a change to your Montana return. 
For example, if you are amending your return 
to claim a Montana tax credit you did not 
previously claim.
If you are amending your return for any other reason 
than the other reasons, mark the “Other” box.
In the first column, list the form or schedule 
you changed.
In the second column, indicate the line that 
reports the new amount.
In the third column, briefly describe why you are 
amending your return.
For example, you are a sole proprietor amending 
your Form 2 to report a business deduction 
because you claimed a federal tax credit. Mark 
the “Amended federal return” box. In the first 
column, enter federal Schedule C and Form 2, 
Schedule I. In the second column enter the line 
number on the Schedule C and line 21 of the 
Schedule I. In the Reason column, enter the 
federal credit being claimed and a description of 
the newly deducted business expenses.
Schedule 2EC – Elderly 
Homeowner/Renter Credit
If you claim the elderly homeowner/renter credit, you 
must include a copy of your 2024 property tax bill 
and/or your signed rent receipts. If you are unable 
to get signed rent receipts, a statement detailing the 
rent paid during the year signed by your landlord 
is an acceptable substitute. If it is your first time 
claiming this credit, you must send us a copy of 
your property tax bill or rent receipts.  When you 
file electronically, you represent that you retained 
the required documents in your tax records and will 
provide those documents to us upon request. If it is 
your first year claiming the credit you must attach 
your property tax bill and/or rent receipts.
When you claim this credit, you attest that you 
meet the following tests:
	
●You are 62 or older as of December 31, 2024. 
If you are married filing jointly and both 
spouses own or rent the residence, only one 
of you must meet the age requirement.
	
●You occupied a Montana residence as 
a renter, owner, or lessee for at least six 
months during the tax year.
	
●You lived in Montana for at least nine months 
during the tax year.
	
●Your total gross household income of all 
members in the household is less than 
$45,000 for the tax year.
	
●You are the only member of your household 
claiming the credit.
If you do not meet all these requirements, you 
cannot claim the credit.
A household means an association of persons 
who live in the same dwelling, sharing its 
furnishings, facilities, accommodations, or 
expenses. You do not need to be related to be in 
the same household. Enter the total number of 
members of the household, including yourself. 
For example, if you lived alone, enter “1.” If you 
lived with your spouse and son, enter “3.”
If you are the personal representative of the 
estate of an eligible individual who died during 
the year, you cannot claim this credit if that 
individual died before October 1, 2024. If you 
are married filing this claim with your spouse and 
if your spouse, who would have been the only 


--- Page 47 ---

Page 39 of 43
2024 Montana Form 2 Instructions
eligible individual, died before October 1, 2024, 
you are not eligible for this credit. You are eligible 
only if, as a surviving spouse, you are age 62 or 
older as of December 31, 2024.
Enter the physical address of the residence 
related to your claim in the specified space at the 
beginning of the schedule, if it is different than the 
mailing address shown on Form 2, page 1. If you 
had multiple residences during the year, enter the 
address of the one you occupied the longest.
Gross Household Income
The gross household income is the sum of all 
the incomes received by the members of the 
household. This amount includes income that 
is both taxable and nontaxable to you, as well 
as the taxable and nontaxable income of each 
member of your household. Generally, the 
amounts on lines 1 through 15 will be found on 
Form 1040 or 1040-SR.
Line 1 – Wages, salaries, tips, etc. Enter the 
amount of your wages, salaries, tips, and other 
compensation for services you performed. If you 
file a Form 1040, this amount is found on line 1z.
Line 2 – Interest. Enter all interest, both taxable 
and nontaxable, you received during the tax 
year. Generally, this is the total of the amounts 
reported on Form 1040, lines 2a and 2b.
Line 3 – Dividends. Enter all dividends, both 
taxable and nontaxable, you received during the 
tax year. If you file a Form 1040, this amount is 
reported on line 3b.
Line 4 – IRA distributions from Form 1099-R. 
Enter all IRA distributions, both taxable and 
nontaxable, received during the tax year. 
Generally, this is the amount from Form 1040, 
line 4a and includes qualified charitable 
distributions made by the trustee of your IRA; 
health funding distributions you elected to 
exclude from gross income for federal tax 
purposes; and conversions from a traditional 
IRA to a Roth IRA. However, do not include any 
nontaxable rollovers.
Line 5 – Pensions and annuities and Tier II 
Railroad Retirement benefits. Enter all taxable 
and nontaxable pensions and annuities, including 
Tier II Railroad Retirement benefits. Generally, 
this amount is what is reported on Form 1040, 
line 5b. However, do not include any nontaxable 
rollovers and your cost or net investment.
Line 6 – Social Security benefits and Tier I 
Railroad Retirement benefits. Enter the total 
taxable and nontaxable Social Security benefits 
and Tier I Railroad Retirement benefits you 
received during the tax year. Generally, this 
amount is reported on Form 1040, line 6a. Do not 
include any Social Security benefits paid directly 
to a nursing home.
Line 7 – Capital gain, including any exclusion. 
Report the total amount of capital gains received 
during the tax year adjusted for the basis of the 
property. Do not adjust the capital gain for any 
federal exclusions, such as the gain from the sale 
of a primary residence and do not include any 
capital losses.
Line 8 – Refundable credits received, 
including your elderly homeowner/renter 
credit received in 2024. Combine all the 
refundable credits received by all household 
members in 2024. Refundable credits include the 
federal and Montana earned income tax credits, 
the refundable portion of the federal child tax 
credit, the unlocking public land credit, the elderly 
homeowner/renter credit, and the 2023 Montana 
property tax rebate.
Line 9 – Alimony. Enter the total of all alimony 
received during the year.
Line 10 – Business income. If you operated a 
business or practiced your profession as a sole 
proprietor, report your net income. Do not include 
any losses generated from the business.
Line 11 – Other gains. Enter the total of income 
received from the sale or exchange of assets 
used in a trade or business. Do not include any 
losses in this amount.
Line 12 – Rental real estate, royalties, 
partnerships, S corporations, trusts, etc. Enter 
the total income received that you would normally 
report on a federal Schedule E. Do not include 
any losses in this amount.


--- Page 48 ---

Page 40 of 43
2024 Montana Form 2 Instructions
Line 13 – Farm income. Enter the total income 
received from farming activities and that are 
normally reported on a federal Schedule F. 
Do not include any losses in this amount.
Line 14 – Unemployment compensation. 
Enter the total of unemployment compensation 
received during the year. Generally, this amount 
is reported to you on a Form 1099-G.
Line 15 – Other income not included above. 
Enter all income that is not reported on lines 1 
through 14. This includes those items of income 
that are normally reported on Form 1040, 
Schedule 1, line 9, excluding any losses.
Line 16 – Government assistance and 
support money. Enter the total amount of 
any government assistance that you received 
during the tax year. This includes veteran’s 
compensation benefits, supplemental security 
income (SSI) payments, worker’s compensation, 
and any other government assistance received 
during the year.
Line 17 – Income received by other members 
of your household. Report the combined 
taxable and nontaxable items of income listed 
above for all other members of the household.
Line 18 – Gross household income. The total 
amount of income from all household members 
used to determine your eligibility for this credit is 
called “Gross Household Income.” Gross household 
income does not always equal the taxable income 
that individuals report on their tax return. It also 
includes income that is normally not taxable.
If the gross income of all members of your 
household is more than $45,000, stop here. You 
cannot claim this credit.
Net Household Income
Complete lines 19 through 22 to calculate your 
net household income. The net household income 
represents the amount of your gross household 
income you can use to pay for part of the property 
tax (or rent-equivalent of the property tax). This 
amount is determined through a formula.
You must first deduct $12,600 from your gross 
household income. Then multiply the result by the 
corresponding multiplier in the Household Income 
Reduction Table below.
Household Income Reduction Table
If the amount on line 20 is
At least:
But not more 
than: 
Your 
multiplier is:
$0
$1,999
0
$2,000
$2,999
0.006
$3,000
$3,999
0.016
$4,000
$4,999
0.024
$5,000
$5,999
0.028
$6,000
$6,999
0.032
$7,000
$7,999
0.035
$8,000
$8,999
0.039
$9,000
$9,999
0.042
$10,000
$10,999
0.045
$11,000
$11,999
0.048
$12,000
and greater
0.05
Credit Computation
Line 23 – Property tax billed. Report the amount 
of taxes, special assessments and fees that were 
billed on the property tax statement. Do not report 
the amount of property tax you paid.
You are allowed only the property tax billed on your 
primary residence and up to one acre of land that 
is associated with this residence. If the one-acre 
farmstead or primary acre is not separately identified 
on your tax bill and if your ownership is less than 
20 acres, your property tax to be used in the credit 
calculation is the larger of 80 percent of the total 
amount of the property tax billed or the total amount 
of property tax billed divided by the total acreage.
If your property tax bill is on property that you held 
in a revocable trust and if you are the grantor(s) of 
that property, or your property taxes are billed to your 
living trust or life estate, you can qualify for this credit.
If the property occupied by you is in a name other 
than your own, the property taxes billed for that 
property can qualify as rent only.
Line 24 – Rent equivalent paid. Your rent 
is only the amount of money that you paid to 
occupy your home.
Do not use rent you pay for an apartment or a 
facility that is exempt from property tax because the 
credit is not allowed in these situations. Verify with 
your landlord or facility that the property is subject to 


--- Page 49 ---

Page 41 of 43
2024 Montana Form 2 Instructions
property taxes beyond assessments such as sewer 
and garbage fees. You may also contact us for 
assistance in determining if the property is exempt 
from property tax. Items that also should not be 
included as rent equivalent paid on line 24 are as 
follows (this list is not all-inclusive):
	
●Mortgage payments, including mortgage 
interest
	
●Nursing home costs that are paid directly 
from Social Security to the facility
	
●Rent paid for you by a rental assistance 
program (this amount should also not be 
included in your gross household income)
If you live in a healthcare, long-term care, personal 
care, or residential care facility, the rent allowed is 
the actual out-of-pocket rent that you paid. It does 
not include services provided by staff, such as 
board expenses including meals, housekeeping, 
transportation, and medical or paramedical 
expenses such as nursing care, assisted living 
care, and memory care. The out-of-pocket rent 
can be determined using a facility statement 
providing the breakdown between rent and these 
amenities. If you do not receive a statement from 
your facility, use Worksheet D, Long-Term Care 
Facility Rent Calculation Worksheet to determine 
the amount of what would be considered board for 
purposes of calculating the credit.
Worksheet D – Long-Term Care
Facility Rent Calculation
1 Total payment to the facility
1
2


If you received board services 
(meals, housekeeping, 
laundry, transportation), 
multiply line 1 by 20% (0.20)



2
3


If you received care (nursing 
care, assisted living care, 
memory care), multiply line 1 
by 30% (0.30)



3
4


Subtract lines 2 and 3 from 
line 1. Enter here and on 
Schedule 2EC, line 24.
	
This is your rent.



4
Line 29 – Credit Multiplier Table
Credit Multiplier Table
If line 18 is 
Multiplier
Less than $35,000
1.00 (100%)
$35,000 to $37,500
0.40 (40%)
$37,501 to $40,000
0.30 (30%)
$40,001 to $42,500
0.20 (20%)
$42,501 to $44,999
0.10 (10%)
$45,000 and greater
0.00 (0%)
Transition Schedule
Prior to the passage of Senate Bill 399 (SB 399) 
by the 2021 Montana Legislature, some taxpayers 
may have reported income and deduction 
amounts on their Montana return that were 
different from the same item reported on their 
federal return. The main group of taxpayers 
affected was married couples who filed a joint 
federal return but separate Montana returns. 
These filers may have had lower amounts allowed 
on their Montana returns for capital and passive 
losses resulting in higher amounts for carried over 
or suspended losses. These different limitations 
may have also led to differences in an individual’s 
basis for a depreciable asset or a liability.
The 2007 Montana Legislature passed 
Senate Bill 281 (SB 281) addressing some of 
these limitations by allowing married couples filing 
separately for Montana to claim the same amounts 
as if they filed jointly. However, the change only 
applied to filings from 2008 forward and did not 
address differences existing at that time.
Part of the changes under SB 281 permitted an 
election for couples to track and calculate capital 
gains and losses independent of each other 
if they filed separately for Montana. This may 
have resulted in the couple’s combined Montana 
capital loss carryover amount(s) differing from 
their joint federal amount.
Starting with the 2024 tax year, Montana taxable 
income will begin with federal taxable income and 
married couples will use the same filing status 
used on their federal return, so there will no 
longer be a recalculation of these items.


--- Page 50 ---

Page 42 of 43
2024 Montana Form 2 Instructions
Since a few individuals might still have different 
amounts not absorbed prior to 2024, temporary 
provisions were included in SB 399 to address 
some of these situations. Affected individuals will 
make a one-time adjustment to their taxable income 
to account for differences in the basis of certain 
assets as well as capital and passive losses.
Other items of income may differ from federal 
amounts. However, capital and passive losses 
and differences in federal and Montana basis are 
the only items eligible for the transition provision. 
Examples of items that are not eligible for the 
provision are:
	
●net operating losses
	
●asset depreciation basis arising from a credit 
or other incentive
	
●carryovers disallowed because of residency 
changes
	
●deferred income
Tax year 2024 is the only year taxpayers can 
elect to report these adjustments. The election 
is made by including the Transition Schedule 
with a Montana return filed on or before the 
extended date. After this date, you cannot make 
adjustments to your Montana income related to 
these items in this or any future tax years.
Part I: Passive Loss, Capital Loss, and 
Basis Adjustments
Passive Loss
Line 1. Add federal Form 8582, Part I, lines 1c 
and 2c for tax year 2024 and enter the result here 
as a positive number.
Lines 2 and 3. Enter the amounts of prior years’ 
unallowed passive losses computed for Montana 
purposes as positive numbers. The amounts 
can be supported with separately prepared prior 
years’ Forms 8582 or Schedules E completed for 
Montana tracking. The information should also be 
reflected on Montana income tax returns for all 
affected tax years.
Line 5. Subtract line 4 from line 1 and enter the 
result here. If the result is less than zero, enter as 
a negative number.
Capital Loss
Line 6. Add federal Schedule D, lines 6 and 14 
for tax year 2024 and enter the result here as a 
positive number.
Lines 7 and 8. Enter the amounts of prior years’ 
carryover capital losses computed for Montana 
purposes as positive numbers. The amounts 
can be supported with separately prepared prior 
years’ Schedules D and Montana income tax 
returns for all affected tax years.
Line 10. Subtract line 9 from line 6 and enter the 
result here. If the result is less than zero, enter as 
a negative number.
Depreciable Asset Basis Adjustment
If prior differences in the calculation of passive or 
capital losses for Montana purposes created a 
difference in the depreciation schedule between 
the Montana and federal tax return you are 
allowed a one-time adjustment to account for 
the difference. An adjustment in this area is not 
allowed if adjustments made to passive and capital 
loss carryovers account for the difference.
Line 11. Report the adjusted basis for federal income 
tax purposes as of January 1, 2024, for the assets.
Line 12. Report the adjusted basis for Montana 
income tax purposes as of January 1, 2024, for 
the same assets.
Line 13. Subtract line 12 from line 11 and enter 
the result here. If the result is less than zero, 
enter as a negative number.
Supporting documentation for any potential 
differences could include copies of Montana 
income tax returns reflecting adjustments to 
income for different depreciation amounts arising 
from basis differences. It would also include 
federal Forms 4562 completed separately 
for federal and Montana purposes and the 
supporting schedules and worksheets.
Total Transition Adjustment
Line 14. Add lines 5, 10, and 13 and enter 
the result here. If less than zero, enter as a 
negative number.
If the amount on line 14 is a positive number, 
enter it on Schedule I, Part I, line 7. If the amount 
is a negative number, enter it as a positive 
number on Schedule I, Part I, line 26.


--- Page 51 ---

Page 43 of 43
2024 Montana Form 2 Instructions
Part II: Recovery of Federal Income Tax 
Deducted for 2023
Prior to the 2024 tax year, Montana allowed an 
itemized deduction for federal income taxes paid. 
Related to that deduction was the requirement to 
determine whether an overpayment arising from 
those payments was taxable. SB 399 did not retain 
the Montana itemized deduction for federal income 
taxes paid but did address any overpayments of 
amounts deducted in prior years. Included in the 
Transition provisions is the requirement to add 
to taxable income a refund of the federal income 
tax deduction claimed in 2023 that was received 
in 2024. Complete Part II of the Transition Schedule 
to determine the amount of your addition.
