


--- Page 20 ---

Page 12 of 43
2024 Montana Form 2 Instructions
distributions from Form(s) 1099-DIV, box 2a; and 
none of your Form(s) 1099-DIV have an amount in 
boxes 2b, 2c, 2d, and 2f.
Lines 11 and 12. Nonresidents, part-year residents, 
and Montana residents filing jointly with nonresident 
or part-year spouses are taxed on their Montana 
source income. The tax on Montana source 
income is first calculated using the taxable income 
determined as if the taxpayer was a resident. Then, 
a ratio of the taxpayer’s income from Montana 
sources over income from all sources is applied to 
the tax. This tax is calculated on Schedule II. Enter 
your Montana Net-Long Term Capital Gains Tax on 
line 11 on Schedule II, line 24. Enter your Montana 
Ordinary Income Tax on line 12 on Schedule II, 
line 19. Instructions for Schedule II, Tax on Montana 
Source Income, are on page 22.
Example: Marla is a nonresident using the 
single status. Her federal taxable income 
on page 1, line 3, is $50,500 and includes 
$10,000 of rental income from a real property 
she owns in Montana. She does not have any 
net long-term capital gains. The rental income 
is Montana source income.
Marla must first calculate her taxable income as 
if she were a resident and calculate her resident 
tax. Her federal taxable income includes $500 
of interest that is exempt in Montana. Since she 
reports the same additions and subtractions 
as a resident, she reports this interest as 
adjustment on her Schedule I. After additions 
and subtractions, Marla’s Montana taxable 
income is $50,000. She figures her tax on 
this amount on page 2, line 12. Her Montana 
Ordinary Income Tax is $2,704.
Marla then calculates her Montana source 
ordinary income ratio on Schedule II. She 
reports $10,000 of rental income on line 10. 
Her Montana source ordinary income ratio on 
line 18 is 20 percent ($10,000/$50,000).
Marla calculates her Montana Source 
Ordinary Income Tax on lines 20 and 26, 
which is $541 ($2,704 x 0.20). She reports 
$541 on Form 2, line 8.
Line 13 – Montana resident tax. This is your 
Montana income tax. Residents enter this amount 
on page 1, line 8. Nonresidents, part-year residents, 
and Montana residents filing jointly with nonresident 
or part-year residents spouses leave this line blank.
Direct Deposit
Important: Direct Deposit is not available to 
taxpayers who are filing a Montana tax return for 
the first time.
If you would like to use direct deposit, enter your 
financial institution’s routing number (RTN#) 
and your account number (ACCT#) in the space 
provided. Your routing number is nine digits and 
your account number can be up to 17 characters, 
including numbers and letters. Mark whether your 
account is a checking or savings account and if 
your refund will go to a bank outside of the United 
States and its territories (Midway Islands, Puerto 
Rico, American Samoa, U.S. Virgin Islands, 
Federated States of Micronesia, and Guam).
If your financial institution does not accept the 
direct deposit, we will mail you a refund check.
A sample of a personal check is provided for 
your reference.
529 and 529A account direct deposit. You may 
directly deposit all or a portion of your tax refund 
into a Montana or out-of-state 529 Qualified Tuition 
Program (Family Education Savings Account) or 
529A Achieving a Better Life Experience (ABLE) 
Account. The 529 or 529A account must already be 
open to make a deposit. You must make a minimum 
deposit of $25. If the amount you elect to deposit 
exceeds your available overpayment for any reason, 
your deposit will be canceled, and any remaining 
funds will be refunded by check or direct deposit.
The amount on this line must match the amount 
reported on page 1, line 25.
For more information about Montana Family 
Education Savings plans, contact Achieve Montana.
https://achievemontana.com/
ClientService@AchieveMontana.com
(877) 486-9271
For more information about Montana 
Achieving a Better Life Experience plans, visit 
https://savewithable.com/ or call (888) 609-3461.


--- Page 21 ---

Page 13 of 43
2024 Montana Form 2 Instructions
Signature, Paid Preparer, and 
Third-Party Designee
Your tax return is not complete unless you sign 
it. Incomplete returns cannot be processed and 
require us to contact you for additional information.
If you have someone prepare your return, you are 
still responsible for the correctness of the return.
Electronic Return Signatures
If you are filing your return electronically, the act 
of filing your return electronically signifies your 
declaration, under the penalty of false swearing, that:
	
●You are the taxpayer identified on the 
return; and
	
●The information on the return is true, correct, 
and complete.
Filing electronically, with this declaration, is 
your signature.
Daytime Phone Number
Providing your daytime phone number may help 
speed the processing of your return. We may 
have questions about items on your return and 
if you are able to answer our questions over the 
phone, we may be able to continue processing 
your return without mailing you a letter. If you are 
filing a joint return, you can enter either your or 
your spouse’s daytime phone number.
If your paid preparer is also a third-party 
designee (see below), you can enter your paid 
preparer’s phone number here.
Paid Preparer
The paid preparer must give you a copy of the 
return for your records.
Signature. Anyone you pay to prepare your 
return must sign it. Someone who prepares your 
return but does not charge you should not sign 
your return.
PTIN. You must report the Preparer Tax 
Identification Number (PTIN) of the preparer in 
the space provided.
Third-Party Designee. To allow us to discuss your 
2024 Form 2 with your paid preparer, your friend, 
family member, or any other person you choose, 
mark the appropriate boxes, and provide the 
required information on Form 2, page 2, Signature, 
Paid Preparer, and Third-Party Designee section.
The Paid Preparer designation box is located 
below the Paid Preparer’s Name box. You must 
include the Preparer’s daytime phone number.
To designate someone other than, or in addition 
to, the paid preparer, mark the box above the 
“Name” field. You must include your designee’s 
name and phone number.
By selecting a Third-Party Designee, you are 
authorizing the designee to:
	
●discuss your 2024 Form 2 return
	
●give us any information that is missing from 
your return, such as a missing Form W-2
	
●call us for information about the processing 
of your return or the status of your refund or 
payments
	
●respond to notices from us about math 
errors, offsets, and return preparation.
Note: the department will only send notices 
directly to you, not to the third-party designee
You are not authorizing the designee to discuss any 
other tax year, receive any refund check, bind you 
to anything, or otherwise represent you before us.
The third-party designee authority only lasts one 
year from the due date of the 2024 return (without 
regard to extensions) and is invalid for amended 
returns filed one year after the original due date. 
This is April 15, 2026, for most people.
Please be aware that you cannot revoke this 
authorization.
If you want to expand the third-party designee’s 
authorization (for example, to verify any 
estimated payments you’ll be making in the 
future or to discuss other tax years), use 
Form POA (Power of Attorney, Authorization 
to Disclose Tax Information). Form POA is 
available at MTRevenue.gov, or you can submit 
a POA through our TransAction Portal (TAP) at 
https://tap.dor.mt.gov.


--- Page 22 ---

Page 14 of 43
2024 Montana Form 2 Instructions
2024 Montana Ordinary Income Tax Rates
Single and Married Filing Separately
If your taxable income without 
long-term capital gains is

But less than
Then your
tax rate is

Less
$0 
$20,500 
4.7%
$0
$20,500 or greater 
5.9%
$246
Married Filing Jointly and Qualifying Surviving Spouse
If your taxable income without 
long-term capital gains is

But less than
Then your
tax rate is

Less
$0 
$41,000 
4.7%
$0
$41,000 or greater 
5.9%
$492
Head of Household
If your taxable income without 
long-term capital gains is

But less than
Then your
tax rate is

Less
$0 
$30,750
4.7%
$0
$30,750 or greater 
5.9%
$369


--- Page 23 ---

Page 15 of 43
2024 Montana Form 2 Instructions
Schedule I – Montana 
Adjustments to Federal 
Taxable Income
Use Schedule I to report all additions and 
subtractions to federal taxable income, and to 
calculate the Montana Medical Savings Account 
addition and subtraction.
Part I reports Montana additions and subtractions 
to federal taxable income. Montana additions 
are all items of income that are not included 
in federal taxable income and must be added 
back to determine Montana taxable income. 
Montana subtractions are all items of income that 
are included in federal taxable income and are 
deducted to determine Montana taxable income.
Part II reports the adjustments for your Montana 
Medical Savings Account (MSA). A taxpayer with 
a Montana MSA can subtract contributions to the 
account plus interest and other income earned 
on the account during the year. Any nonqualified 
withdrawals must be added back to federal taxable 
income and may be subject to a recapture tax.
Part I: Montana Additions and 
Subtractions
Additions
Line 1 – Interest and mutual fund dividends 
from state, county, or municipal bonds from 
other states. Enter the interest and mutual fund 
dividend income that you received from bonds 
and obligations of another state, territory, or 
political subdivision of another state (county, 
municipality, district, etc.).
Line 2 – Other recoveries of amounts 
deducted in earlier years that reduced 
Montana taxable income. If, in 2024, you 
received a reimbursement of an amount that you 
previously deducted on your Montana tax return 
and this deduction originally reduced the amount 
of your Montana income tax liability in the year of 
the deduction, you may need to report as income 
a portion or all of the reimbursement that you 
received on your 2024 tax return.
Do not include any refund of federal tax 
previously deducted on Form 2. Beginning with 
tax year 2024, refunds of federal income tax 
deducted on the Montana return before tax year 
2023 are no longer subject to the tax benefit rule. 
For refunds of federal taxes deducted on the 
2023 Form 2, see Transition Schedule.
Do not include the amount of 2023 Montana 
property tax rebate received in 2024 that was 
included in your 2023 itemized deductions.
Line 3 – Nonqualified withdrawals from 
a Montana savings account. If you took a 
nonqualified withdrawal from a Montana MSA or 
a Montana First-Time Homebuyer Account, you 
must add back the amount of the nonqualified 
withdrawal to your federal taxable income. 
Mark the box for the account that you took a 
nonqualified withdrawal from.
More information about nonqualified withdrawals 
from a Montana MSA is on page 22.
First-Time Homebuyer Account Nonqualified 
Withdrawals. Nonqualified withdrawals from a 
Montana First-Time Homebuyer Account are 
amounts not used for the down payment and 
allowable closing costs for the purchase of a 
first-time home, amounts held in the account for 
longer than 10 years, or amounts remaining in the 
account after becoming a nonresident. You must pay 
a 10 percent penalty on this withdrawal unless the 
withdrawal was on the last business day of the year. 
See page 23 for more information.
The funds in a Montana First-Time Homebuyer 
Account must be used within 10 years of the 
establishment of the account. Any principal and 
interest in your account not used to purchase 
your home within this 10-year period, or after you 
have purchased your home, is taxed as ordinary 
income, and reported on this line.
If you become a nonresident and have unused 
funds in your First-Time Homebuyer Account, the 
amount of income in the final year of residency, 
along with the amount of principal and interest 
previously excluded from adjusted gross income 
is considered a nonqualified withdrawal. These 
amounts are considered ordinary income to 
Montana and subject to tax. Unless it is withdrawn 
on the last day of the year while still a Montana 
resident these amounts are also subject to the 10% 
nonqualified withdrawal penalty (see page 36).


--- Page 24 ---

Page 16 of 43
2024 Montana Form 2 Instructions
Line 4 – State income tax deduction included in 
federal taxable income. You must add back any 
state income tax deducted from your federal taxable 
income. This includes deductions taken in the 
determination of your business income. Examples 
of state income taxes that may have been deducted 
from your federal taxable income include:
	
●Pass-through entity taxes paid in another 
state or in Montana
	
●Pass-through entity composite taxes paid in 
another state
	
●Mineral royalty withholding taken as an 
expense on your Form 1040, Schedule E.
Do not include the state income taxes taken as 
a deduction on your federal itemized deductions. 
This amount is already excluded from your 
Montana taxable income on page 1, line 2.
Line 5 – Expenses used to claim a Montana 
tax credit. If you claim a Montana tax credit 
and reduced your federal taxable income by 
deducting expenses associated with that credit, 
you must add the amount of the expenses used 
to calculate your credit as an addition to federal 
taxable income on this line.
Line 6 – Other additions. Enter any other 
additions to federal taxable income not included 
on lines 1 through 5 and enter the code. You may 
only enter up to two codes on this line. If you 
have more than two additions, attach a statement 
with the code and report the total amount of all 
additions on this line. Other additions include:
Taxes paid by an S corporation – Code AC. If 
you are a shareholder in an S corporation that is 
required to pay a federal income tax on its income, 
include on this line, along with code AC, the amount 
of your income that has been reduced by the 
federal income taxes paid by your S corporation. 
Refer to your federal Schedule K-1 to determine 
the amount of income that you must include as an 
addition to your federal taxable income.
Farm and ranch risk management account 
taxable distributions – Code: AF. Prior to 
January 1, 2024, an individual or a family 
farm corporation with an eligible agricultural 
business could establish a Farm and Ranch Risk 
Management Account. Taxpayers may no longer 
open an account as of January 1, 2024. Deposits 
made into the account could be subtracted from 
federal adjusted gross income.
Report on this line, with code AF, any 
distribution that was:
	
●previously excluded from Montana adjusted 
gross income as a Farm and Ranch Risk 
Management Account deposit; 
	
●not distributed within three years from the 
date the original deposit was made
In addition, if at any time within the three-year 
period, that the individual or business was 
no longer engaged in an eligible agricultural 
business, the entire balance in the account is 
considered to be distributed and must be added 
back to federal taxable income on this line.
Distributions not made within three years of the 
deposit are considered to have been distributed on 
the last day of the third year and are subject to a 
penalty equal to 10% of the tax due on this amount. 
See page 37 for more information on the penalty.
Title plant amortization and depreciation – 
Code: AG. If you are taking a federal deduction 
for amortization depreciation on a title plant, you 
must add back to your federal taxable income the 
amount of this deduction, along with code AG, on 
this line.
Other additions – Code: AZ. Report any other 
additions to federal taxable income on this line 
along with code AZ. If you included medical 
expenses in your federal itemized deductions that 
you used your MSA funds to pay for, report those 
amounts here.
Line 7 – Transition adjustment for tax year 
2024. If you make an election to report a 
transition adjustment, report the amounts used 
to reconcile the difference in the federal and 
Montana amounts of passive activity losses, 
short-term and long-term capital losses. This 
also includes any difference between the federal 
and Montana basis of an asset. Attach Transition 
Schedule to your return. See Transition Schedule 
instructions for more information.
Line 8 – Recovery of federal income tax 
deducted in 2023. If you make an election to 
report a transition adjustment, and you received 
a federal income tax refund in 2024 from federal 
taxes you claimed as an itemized deduction on 
your 2023 Montana tax return, you may need to 
report all or a portion of your federal refund as 
income on your Montana tax return.


--- Page 25 ---

Page 17 of 43
2024 Montana Form 2 Instructions
No addition is necessary if you do not elect to 
make a transition adjustment, you claimed the 
standard deduction on your 2023 Form 2, or you 
limited your deduction to the amount of income 
tax included on your 2023 return.
Complete Transition Schedule, Part II, to 
calculate your recovery of federal income tax 
deducted on your 2023 tax return.
Subtractions
Line 10 – State income tax refunds. Income tax 
refunds received from Montana or another state 
are not taxable. If you are required to include 
your state income tax refund on Form 1040, 
Schedule 1, line 1, report that amount on this line.
Line 11 – Interest and mutual fund dividends 
from federal bonds, notes, and obligations. 
If you received interest on United States 
government obligations and mutual fund 
dividends attributable to that interest, you may 
subtract these amounts if they are included 
in your federal taxable income. Additionally, if 
you received interest on obligations from U.S. 
territory or government agency obligations that 
are specifically exempt by federal law, or mutual 
fund dividends attributable to this interest, you 
can subtract these amounts if they are included 
in your federal taxable income.
U.S. obligations that are exempt include:
	
●Series E, EE, F, G, H, and I savings bonds
	
●U.S. treasury bills
	
●U.S. government notes
	
●U.S. government certificates
Interest on obligations that are only guaranteed 
by the U.S. government are not tax exempt. 
You cannot subtract the interest or mutual 
fund dividends attributable to Government 
National Mortgage Association (Ginnie Mae) 
bonds, Federal National Mortgage Association 
(Fannie Mae), or Federal Home Loan Mortgage 
Corporation (FHLMAC) securities.
Line 12 – Recoveries of amounts deducted in 
earlier years included in federal taxable income 
that did not reduce Montana income tax. If you 
are required to include in your federal taxable 
income any recovery of amounts that were 
refunded to you after you claimed the deduction of 
the expense on a prior federal income tax return, 
and if this previous deduction did not reduce your 
Montana income tax liability in the year of that 
deduction, you can subtract the amount of this 
recovery from your federal taxable income.
Line 13 – Exempt tribal income. If you are 
an enrolled member of a tribe who lives on the 
reservation governed by your tribe, you can 
subtract the following income that can be sourced 
to the reservation governed by your tribe:
Wages earned within the exterior boundaries of 
your reservation
	
●All interest, dividends, pensions, annuities, 
and any income received from the use of 
intangible properties
	
●Income, including farming, from real 
properties located within the exterior 
boundaries of your reservation
	
●Any business income from activities 
carried on within the exterior boundaries 
of your reservation
	
●If you did not reside on the reservation 
governed by your tribe for the entire year, 
you can subtract only those wages or other 
income that you earned while you lived and 
worked on your own reservation.
Report the details on Form ETM and include it 
with your Form 2.
Line 14 – Military salary of an active duty 
servicemember. If you are receiving military 
compensation as a member of the regular U.S. 
Armed Forces on active duty, or as a member of 
the National Guard under Title 10 USC orders, 
and this compensation is included in your federal 
taxable income, you can use this line to subtract 
your basic, special, and incentive pay from your 
federal taxable income.
If you receive wages under the Combat 
Zone Exclusion that are not included on your 
Form W-2, they will not be included in your 
federal taxable income, so there is no need to 
subtract them on this line. However, if you are a 
commissioned officer who could not exclude all 
your wages received under the Combat Zone 
Exclusion because it exceeded the highest rate 
of enlisted pay for each part of the month you 
served in a combat zone, or because you were 
hospitalized as a result of your service there, you 
may include the additional combat pay that was 
included in your federal taxable income.


--- Page 26 ---

Page 18 of 43
2024 Montana Form 2 Instructions
If you are a member of the National Guard, you 
can subtract your compensation received under 
Title 10 USC orders, or as part of a homeland 
defense activity as defined in 32 USC 901, or as 
part of a contingency operation as defined in 10 
USC 101, on this line. Compensation received 
for completing your annual training, inactive duty 
trainings, or when you engaged in “active Guard 
and Reserve duty” as defined Title 10 USC 101, is 
not deductible and must not be included on this line.
Do not add any retirement, retainer, equivalent 
pay, or allowances on this line.
If you claim this exemption, include verification of 
your military status (such as your military orders) 
with your income tax return. Contact the department 
or visit MTRevenue.gov for more information.
Line 15 – Subtraction for working military 
retirees and military survivor benefits. Montana 
resident working military retirees may be eligible to 
subtract a portion of their military retirement income 
from Montana taxable income. The subtraction is 
also available to resident beneficiaries receiving 
military survivor benefits. For military retirees, the 
subtraction is equal to the lesser of:
	
●50% of the taxpayer’s military retirement 
income received from the Defense Finance 
and Accounting Service (DFAS), or
	
●The amount of Montana source income from:
	
○Wages, salary, and tips from 
compensation performed in Montana
	
○Net income from a trade or business in 
Montana
	
○Net income from farming activities in 
Montana
Beneficiaries receiving military survivor benefits 
under the U.S. Department of Defense’s Survivor 
Benefit Plan can exempt up to 50% of their military 
survivor benefits. Eligible beneficiaries include 
spouses, eligible children, or an “insurable interest” 
as defined by the U.S. Department of Defense.
Retirees and beneficiaries must meet certain 
residency requirements to claim this subtraction. 
The subtraction is for taxpayers that became 
a Montana resident after June 30, 2023, or for 
a Montana resident that was a resident before 
receiving military retirement income or survivor 
benefits and remained a resident thereafter. 
The exemption is not available to retirees or 
beneficiaries that were nonresidents when 
they began receiving military retirement if they 
became a resident before July 1, 2023, or if they 
were previously qualified to claim the exemption 
but become nonresidents after receiving the 
exemption in a future tax year.
The deduction can only be claimed for five 
consecutive years after meeting the eligibility 
requirements. For retirees or beneficiaries 
who were residents before July 1, 2023, the 
exemption is available for five years after 
tax year 2024, which is tax year 2028.
See Form WMRE for more information. If you 
claim this subtraction, you must include Form 
WMRE with your return.
Line 16 – Montana Medical Savings Account 
(MSA) deposits and earnings. Report the 
subtraction amount from Part II (Montana Medical 
Savings Account (MSA) Adjustment), line 4.
Line 17 – First-Time Homebuyer Account 
deposits and earnings from deposits made 
before January 1, 2024. Before January 1, 2024, 
Montana residents could open and deposit 
amounts into a Montana First-Time Homebuyer 
Savings Account to save for the cost of a first 
home. Taxpayers could subtract up to $3,000 
of deposits to the account plus interest or other 
earnings on these funds.
After January 1, 2024, deposits may no 
longer be made to these accounts. However, 
taxpayers may still take a subtraction from 
federal taxable income for deposits made before 
January 1, 2024, as well as any interest or 
earnings made on the principal of the account.
The contributed funds can only be withdrawn for 
the down payment and allowable closing costs 
for purchasing your first single-family residence in 
Montana. If you withdraw any of these funds for 
other purposes, they are subject to tax in the year 
they are withdrawn. They may also be subject to 
a 10 percent penalty unless they are withdrawn 
on the last business day of the year.
Funds must be used to purchase your first 
single-family residence within 10 years of when the 
account was opened. Any funds not spent within 
that time are subject to tax. See page 15 for more 
information on nonqualified withdrawals and page 36 
for the First-Time Homebuyer Account penalty.


--- Page 27 ---

Page 19 of 43
2024 Montana Form 2 Instructions
Note for lines 18 and 19. If you are planning to 
deposit all or part of your refund for tax year 2024 
in a 529 or 529A account, this contribution is 
deductible in the year the contribution was made. 
For example, if you make a contribution to a 529A 
account in 2025 with your 2024 tax refund, the 
contribution is deductible on your 2025 tax return.
Line 18 – Family Education Savings account 
(529 plan) deposits. Eligible taxpayers can 
deduct up to $3,000 ($6,000 if married filing 
jointly and both spouses separately make 
deposits) of eligible deposits to a Montana Family 
Education Savings Account or another state’s 
529 plan. You may claim the deduction if:
	
●you own the account,
	
●your spouse owns the account, or
	
●your child or stepchild owns the account and 
is a Montana resident.
Withdrawals of your contributions and earnings 
from a Montana Family Education Savings 
Account or another state’s 529 plan are not 
taxable to you if you withdraw them to pay for 
qualified education expenses. Qualified education 
expenses are defined in 26 USC 529 and include:
	
●tuition, fees, books, supplies, and equipment 
required for enrollment or attendance at an 
eligible postsecondary school
	
●expenses for special need services 
needed for a student with special needs in 
connection with enrollment or attendance at 
an eligible postsecondary school
	
●expenses for room and board for students 
who are enrolled at least half-time at an 
eligible postsecondary school
	
●computer or peripheral equipment, software, 
or internet access if it is used by the 
beneficiary while enrolled at an eligible 
postsecondary school
	
●fees, books, supplies, and equipment 
related to the participation in an eligible 
apprenticeship program certified with the 
U.S. Secretary of Labor
	
●up to $10,000 of principal or interest on 
a qualified student loan for a designated 
beneficiary or a designated beneficiary’s sibling
	
●up to $10,000 of tuition for enrollment at 
an elementary or secondary (K-12) public, 
private, or religious school
If you withdraw these funds for purposes other 
than to pay for qualified education expenses, 
they are subject to a recapture tax of 5.9 percent, 
which is reported on Schedule IV, line 7.
Contributions to a state’s prepaid tuition plan or 
Coverdell ESA do not qualify for the subtraction.
To establish a Montana Family Education 
Savings Account or for additional information, 
contact the Achieve Montana Program at 
(877) 486-9271 or achievemontana.com.
Line 19 – Achieving a Better Life Experience 
Act (ABLE) account deposits. You can 
subtract deposits that you made into one or more 
qualifying Achieving a Better Life Experience Act 
(ABLE) accounts during the year, not to exceed 
$3,000 ($6,000 if married filing jointly and both 
spouses separately make deposits).
Generally, qualified ABLE accounts are 
established to support another person’s qualified 
disability expenses and meet the requirements of 
26 USC 529A. This subtraction is only allowed for 
contributions that you make to qualifying ABLE 
accounts that are owned by you or your spouse or 
to an ABLE account of which you are the parent, 
grandparent, sibling, or child of the designated 
beneficiary by blood, marriage, or legal adoption.
Funds in the account must be spent on qualified 
disability expenses related to the blindness 
or disability of the account owner such as: 
education, housing, transportation, personal 
support services, assistive technology, or health.
If contributions or earnings are withdrawn for 
purposes other than to pay for qualified disability 
expenses, those related contributions may be 
subject to a recapture tax of 5.9 percent, and 
related earnings are included in gross income. The 
recapture tax is reported on Schedule IV, line 7.
Line 20 – Subtraction for business-related 
expenses for purchasing recycled material. 
You can subtract 10 percent of the expenses your 
business paid for purchasing recycled products 
from your federal taxable income. This subtraction 
is allowed only to businesses within Montana. It 
applies to products purchased that contain recycled 
material at a level consistent with industry standards 
or consistent with the standards established by 
the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). 
Include Form RCYL if you claim this subtraction.


--- Page 28 ---

Page 20 of 43
2024 Montana Form 2 Instructions
Line 21 – Business expenses not included 
in federal taxable income due to an existing 
federal credit taken. If you incurred a business 
expense which was disallowed because you 
claimed a federal tax credit, you can deduct this 
business expense for Montana tax purposes. 
This subtraction includes wage deductions 
reduced by the federal targeted jobs credit or the 
credits for the portion of employer Social Security 
taxes paid with respect to employee cash tips.
Do not include any recoveries of capital 
expenditures through depreciation, depletion, 
or amortization. Depreciation, depletion, and 
amortization deductions must be the same for 
federal and Montana income tax purposes.
Line 22 – Certain expenses incurred by 
cannabis businesses. If you are a cannabis 
business registered in the state of Montana, 
you can subtract on this line your ordinary 
and necessary business expenses typically 
disallowed under IRC 280E.
Under IRC 280E, cannabis businesses are generally 
not allowed a deduction on their federal return for 
business expenses associated with the production 
and sale of cannabis other than those directly related 
to the cost of manufacturing the product.
Line 23 – Business sales and miscellaneous 
Montana subtractions. Only the following 
subtractions may be entered on this line.
Sales of land to beginning farmers – 
Code: SE. You can subtract 100 percent of 
your income or capital gain (up to $50,000) 
that you recognized from the sale of at least 
80 acres or more of land to a beginning farmer 
at 9 percent or less interest on a long-term 
contract. To qualify for this deduction, you 
need to apply to the Agricultural Loan Authority 
of the Montana Department of Agriculture. 
Include a copy of this approval with your tax 
return. To learn more about the Montana 
Beginning Farm/Ranch Loan Program contact 
the Rural Development Section Manager at 
(406) 444-5420 or visit https://agr.mt.gov/
Topics/E-G/Grants-Pages/Beginning-Farm-
Ranch-Loans.
Capital gain on eligible sale of mobile home 
park – Code: SJ. If you were the owner of 
a mobile home park and you sold the park 
to a tenants’ or mobile home park residents’ 
association, a 501(c)(3) organization or a 
county or municipal housing authority, you can 
subtract all of the capital gain realized from 
the sale of the mobile home park. If you are 
claiming this subtraction, attach a copy of the 
sales agreement to your form.
Capital gains and dividends from Montana 
small business investment company – 
Code: SO. If you have capital gains or dividend 
income from an investment in a small business 
investment company (SBIC) included in your 
federal taxable income, you can exempt these 
capital gains or dividends if all of the following 
conditions are met:
	
●The SBIC must be organized with the purpose 
of diversifying and strengthening employment 
opportunities of companies in Montana.
	
●Within one year of being licensed by the 
U.S. Small Business Administration, 75 
percent of the SBIC’s investments must 
be in manufacturing or timber companies 
located in Montana.
	
●The SBIC’s manufacturing and timber 
companies must have at least 50 percent 
of their employees working in Montana.
If you are claiming this subtraction, attach a 
copy of the statement you received from the 
Montana small business investment company.
Certain gains recognized by liquidating 
corporation – Code: SG. You can subtract 
from your federal taxable income the portion 
of your gain from the liquidation of a reporting 
corporation to the extent that this gain is 
included in the gross income of the liquidating 
corporation’s Montana corporate income tax 
return. If you are claiming this subtraction, 
attach a copy of the statement you received 
from the liquidating corporation.
Payment received by an individual 
landowner for providing public access to 
public land – Code: SN. An individual that 
receives a grant from Montana Department of 
Natural Resources and Conservation to pay 
for costs associated with an access project 
that secures public access through private 
land to public land for which there is no other 
legal public access or to enhance existing 
access to public land can subtract this amount 
from federal taxable income.


--- Page 29 ---

Page 21 of 43
2024 Montana Form 2 Instructions
Montana End of Watch Trust Payment – 
Code: SP. If, and to the extent, a payment you 
received from the Montana End of Watch Trust 
is included in your federal taxable income, that 
amount is exempt from Montana tax.
Montana-produced organic or inorganic 
fertilizer – Code: SQ. You can take a 
subtraction for purchasing organic fertilizer and 
inorganic fertilizer produced as a byproduct 
produced in Montana and used in Montana if 
the expenditure was not otherwise deducted in 
computing taxable income. Include a detailed 
statement documenting your eligible expenses.
Death benefits for a National Guard or 
Reservist Member – Code: SR. If you 
received a death benefit payment from 
the Montana Department of Military Affairs 
because you are the survivor of a member of 
the National Guard who died while on state 
active-duty orders, and this death benefit was 
included in your federal taxable income, that 
amount is exempt from Montana tax.
If you have more than two types of subtractions 
to report on this line, report the total of all the 
subtractions and attach a statement with the 
additional corresponding codes.
Lines 24 and 25 – Railroad Retirement Benefits. 
Montana does not tax federal Railroad Retirement 
Benefits paid by the Railroad Retirement Board. 
Enter the amount of Tier I benefits included on 
Form 1040, line 6b on line 24. Include Tier II 
benefits included on Form 1040, line 5b, on line 25. 
Also include on line 25 any sickness benefits 
paid to you by the Railroad Retirement Board as 
reported on your Form W-2.
Line 27 – Transition adjustment for tax year 
2024 from Transition Schedule. If you make an 
election to report a transition adjustment, report 
the amounts used to reconcile the difference in 
the federal and Montana amounts of passive 
activity losses, short-term and long-term capital 
losses, and any differing bases. Attach Transition 
Schedule to your return. See Transition Schedule 
instructions for more information.
Part II: Montana Medical Savings 
Account (MSA) Adjustment
An account holder who establishes a Montana 
Medical Savings Account (or whose employer 
establishes an account for them) to pay 
for eligible medical expenses can exclude 
contributions plus interest and other income 
earned on the account during the year. In 2024 
contributions are limited to $4,500. Account 
holders must be Montana residents.
Do not confuse the Montana MSA with the federal 
Health Savings Account (HSA) that is deductible on 
Form 1040, Schedule 1, line 13. You can participate 
in both programs. See the federal Form 1040 
instructions for information about the federal HSA.
MSA accounts are usually self-administered. This 
means that the owner of the account keeps track 
of the contributions, earnings, and expenditures 
from the account. The account can be established 
at any financial institution registered in the state 
of Montana. In addition to checking and savings 
accounts at a Montana financial institution, MSAs 
can also be invested in stocks, bonds, mutual 
funds, or a combination of both. The MSA can also 
be established in an account that is allowable for a 
federal HSA. Note that while the MSA may be placed 
in an investment vehicle used for HSAs, the MSA 
cannot also be an HSA. To claim a subtraction for an 
MSA contribution and earnings, those amounts must 
be included in federal taxable income.
You can use the Montana Medical Care 
Savings Account Log found on our website at 
MTRevenue.gov to track your account activity.
If you are married filing jointly with your spouse, 
you must establish separate accounts. You can 
each contribute the maximum amount to the 
account and take a subtraction for the amount 
of the contributions to and earnings from each 
account. When reporting your MSA information, 
combine the amounts for each spouse.
MSA Subtraction
Line 1 – Beginning balance. Each MSA 
account holder must report their beginning 
balance in this section.


--- Page 30 ---

Page 22 of 43
2024 Montana Form 2 Instructions
Line 2 – Total contributions for the year. 
Report the total amount of contributions for 
the year, limited to $4,500 for each taxpayer in 
2024. If you are married filing jointly and each 
spouse contributed to their account, combine 
that amount. Each spouse can contribute up to 
$4,500 to their own account.
Line 3 – Earnings from the account: interest, 
dividends, capital gains, etc. Report the 
earnings for 2024 on line 3. Earnings can be found 
on the Form 1099 you received from the financial 
institution where the account is held. Do not 
include earnings that are tax-exempt for federal 
purposes or Montana purposes on this line.
If your MSA account is an investment-type 
account and lost income during the year due 
to market conditions, mark the box and enter 
0 (zero) on this line.
MSA Addition
Line 5 – Total withdrawals made during the year. 
Report your total withdrawals made during the year. 
In general, this line will equal the beginning balance 
minus the ending balance, plus the subtraction 
calculated for the year on line 4.
If your MSA account is an investment-type 
account and lost income during the year due to 
market conditions, only report the withdrawals 
you made during the year. Do not report any 
losses on the account.
Line 6 – Withdrawals for eligible expenses. 
Report your withdrawals for eligible expenses on 
this line. Eligible expenses are medical and dental 
expenses allowed as an itemized deduction under 
IRC 213(d). See IRS Publication 502, Medical and 
Dental Expenses, for information on what types of 
expenses qualify under IRC 213(d).
In addition to the expenses allowed under 
IRC 213(d), you may withdraw funds from your MSA 
to pay for long-term care expenses, annuities, and 
insurance; family leave expenses; direct patient care 
payments; and healthcare sharing ministry expenses.
A family leave expense means an expense that 
approximates wages on a monthly basis that 
are lost by an immediate family member. These 
wages must be lost for the purposes of the 
federal Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993. 
To figure the lost wages, multiply the hourly wage 
by the amount of hours of work lost.
Withdrawals must be made by January 15 of 
the following tax year, even if you established 
residency in another state.
Line 7 – Nonqualified withdrawals. 
Nonqualified withdrawals are withdrawals from 
your MSA that are not considered a withdrawal 
for eligible expenses reported above on line 6. 
Subtract your eligible withdrawals on line 6 from 
your total withdrawals on line 5.
If you become a nonresident, any funds in your 
account that have not been spent on eligible 
expenses by the time you become a nonresident 
are considered nonqualified withdrawals. Report 
those amounts on this line.
Line 8 – Nonqualified withdrawals not 
subject to the 10 percent penalty. Nonqualified 
withdrawals that are not subject to the 10 
percent penalty are withdrawals made on the 
last business day of the year. If you established 
residency in another state, the balance on your 
account on the date you became a nonresident 
are also not subject to the 10 percent penalty.
Line 9 – Nonqualified withdrawals subject to 
penalty. Withdrawals from your MSA are subject 
to a 10 percent penalty if they are not eligible 
expenses and are withdrawn on any day other 
than the last business day of the year. Multiply 
the amount on this line by 10 percent (0.10) and 
report it on Schedule IV, line 6.
Schedule II – Tax on Montana 
Source Income
If you are a nonresident, part-year resident, or a 
Montana resident filing jointly with a nonresident 
or part-year resident spouse you must use 
Schedule II to report your Montana source 
income and determine your Montana tax liability; 
and attach it to your return.
You must complete pages 1, 2, and Schedule I 
(if applicable), before completing Schedule II. 
On Schedule II, you will calculate the ratio of 
your Montana source income (numerator) over 
total income (denominator). There are two ratios 
to figure tax on Montana source income; one 
is for income that is not considered a net-long 
term capital gain (Montana ordinary income); 
and another ratio for tax on Montana source 
net long-term capital gains. Once these ratios 


--- Page 31 ---

Page 23 of 43
2024 Montana Form 2 Instructions
are calculated, you will determine your tax 
by multiplying each ratio by your related tax 
determined as if you were a resident from Page 2.
Montana source income is the income or loss you 
received for work that you performed in Montana, 
from real or personal property located in 
Montana, and income or loss you received from 
business conducted in Montana. Your Montana 
source income also includes your distributive 
share of the Montana source income or loss from 
an S Corporation. If you are a Montana resident, 
Montana source income includes all income, no 
matter where you earned it.
Part-year residents calculate their tax like 
nonresidents. However, part-year residents must 
include in the numerator of their ratio all income 
received while they were a resident. For example, 
you relocated to Montana and established residency 
on July 1. You are filing your Montana tax return as 
a part-year resident reporting wages earned both 
within and outside of Montana, along with interest 
and dividends that you earned throughout the year. 
For the period of January 1 through June 30, your 
wages, interest, and dividends are not considered 
Montana source income. The wages, interest, and 
dividends that you received on or after July 1 are 
Montana source income taxable to Montana and 
reported on this schedule.
Residents filing jointly with nonresident or part-
year resident spouses figure their tax in the same 
manner as a nonresident or part-year resident. 
However, all of the resident spouse’s income is 
included in the numerator along with the Montana 
source income of the nonresident or part-year 
spouse. For example, Jim is a nonresident and 
Pam is a resident. Jim’s income consists of 
wages earned in another state and interest from 
his personal savings account. Pam’s income 
consists of business income. The couple jointly 
owns a rental property located in Montana. 
Pam will report all of her income and the total 
amount of the income from the rental property 
to determine the couple’s tax on Montana 
source income. Jim’s wages and interest are not 
considered Montana source income and are not 
reported on the Schedule II.
Reporting Montana Source Capital Gains
Net-long term capital gains are taxed at a different 
tax rate than Montana ordinary income. Taxpayers 
required to complete Schedule II calculate their 
Montana Source Net Long-Term Capital Gains 
Tax by applying a ratio of their Montana source net 
long-term capital gains to their net long-term capital 
gains from all sources on lines 21 through 25. That 
ratio is then applied to the Montana Net Long-Term 
Capital Gains Tax, from page 2, line 11, as if the 
taxpayer was a resident.
Short-term capital gains are subject to the 
Montana Ordinary Income Tax Rate.
Montana source net short-term capital gains or 
losses are those from the sale or transfer of tangible 
property located in Montana, or for your tangible 
property located in Montana, or for your tangible 
property used or held in connection with your 
trade, business, or occupation that is carried on in 
Montana for those assets held one year or less.
Where applicable, include the portion of any 
gains or losses received during the part of the 
year in which you were a nonresident for the 
sale or transfer of your tangible property located 
in Montana, or for the sale or transfer of any 
tangible property used or held in connection with 
your trade, business, or occupation that is carried 
on in Montana.
In general, if you are a nonresident who sold an 
interest in a publicly traded partnership doing 
business in Montana, some or all of the gain is 
Montana source income. Multiply your gain by the 
partnership’s apportionment factor for the year 
you sold your interest. If the apportionment factor 
was not reported to you on the Schedule K-1, 
contact the partnership for the factor.
If you sold an interest in a single-member limited 
liability company or any disregarded entity, it is 
considered a sale of the assets of the company, 
not as the sale of an interest in an entity. Report 
any capital gain related to the sale of tangible 
assets located in Montana on this line. If you 
sold your interest while a resident (or a part-year 
resident) report the entire gain.
Report your distributable share of any separately 
stated Montana source capital gain from a pass-
through entity. If it is a short-term gain, report it 
on line 7. Net long-term capital gains are reported 


--- Page 32 ---

Page 24 of 43
2024 Montana Form 2 Instructions
on line 22 for the computation of the Montana 
Source Net Long-Term Capital Gains Tax. Your 
distributable share of Montana source capital 
gain or loss are found on lines 8 and 9 of your 
Montana Schedules K-1.
If you reported exempt capital gains and 
dividends from a Montana Small Business 
Investment Company as a subtraction on 
Schedule I, you must reduce the capital gains 
sourced to Montana by the same amount.
Report the net amount of your IRC 1231 gain 
sourced to Montana on line 22. To figure if you 
have an IRC 1231 overall gain, you must add all 
your Montana source IRC 1231 gains and losses 
from your Montana Schedules K-1 and your 
federal Form 4797 you filed as a sole proprietor.
If you are a part-year resident, only those capital 
gains from sources within Montana as well 
as those amounts earned while a resident of 
Montana are sourced to Montana.
If you are a resident filing jointly with a 
nonresident or part-year resident spouse, all 
of your capital gains are sourced to Montana, 
regardless of where they were generated. Your 
nonresident or part-year resident spouse’s 
capital gains are sourced to Montana using the 
standards for a nonresident or part-year resident.
Line Instructions
Spouses with Different States of Residency. 
Complete this section if one spouse was a 
Montana resident at any time during the tax 
year and is filing jointly with a nonresident. 
Also complete the Part-Year Resident Information 
if one or both spouses were part-year residents 
during the tax year.
Line 1 – Montana source wages, salaries, 
tips, etc. If you are a nonresident, enter the 
amount of your wages, salaries, tips, and other 
compensation for services that you performed in 
Montana and that are included on your federal 
Form 1040, line 1z.
If you are a part-year resident, enter all the 
wages, salaries, tips, and other compensation 
for services that you earned while you were 
a Montana resident, regardless of where 
you earned this income. Also include, where 
applicable, the portion of your wages, salaries, 
tips, and other compensation that you received 
for services in Montana during the part of the 
year that you were a nonresident.
If you are a resident filing jointly with a nonresident 
or part-year resident spouse, enter all of your 
wages, salaries, tips, and other compensation 
that are reported on Form 1040, line 1z. If your 
spouse has any wages, salaries, tips, and other 
compensation earned in Montana or as a Montana 
resident, also enter that amount on this line.
Do not include compensation that is exempt from 
Montana tax on this line. This includes exempt 
tribal income, military salary of residents on 
active duty, military salary of nonresident military 
servicemembers, salary of a nonresident spouse 
of a nonresident military servicemember, or 
wages covered by the Montana/North Dakota 
reciprocity agreement.
If your employer did not break out your wages 
earned while working in Montana, you will 
determine your Montana source wages based on 
how your employer pays you. Hourly employees 
multiply the hourly rate by the number of hours 
spent working in Montana.
Example: You are paid $25 per hour and 
worked in Montana full-time for seven weeks. 
Your Montana source wages are $7,000 
($25 multiplied by 280 hours (seven 40-hour 
work weeks)).
Salaried employees whose wages are not broken 
out by the location where they were earned, 
report Montana source income based on the 
amount of time worked in Montana. Salaried 
employees may apply a ratio of the amount of 
time worked in Montana to the total amount of 
time worked in the year. The employee may also 
use a method that is reasonable based on the 
type of work performed.
Example: You earn $600,000 per year and spent 
four months working in Montana. Four months of 
the year is 33 percent of the year. Your Montana 
source wages are $198,000 (33 percent of your 
yearly salary of $600,000).
If you are a nonresident, worked in Montana for 
30 days or less, worked in more than one state, 
and earned only wages while working in Montana, 
you have an exemption from filing a Montana tax 
return. However, certain types of employees do 
not qualify for the exemption, including:


--- Page 33 ---

Page 25 of 43
2024 Montana Form 2 Instructions
	
●professional athletes
	
●professional entertainers
	
●an employee performing services for 
compensation on a per-event basis
	
●someone who receives lottery winnings from 
a lottery ticket purchased in Montana
	
●construction workers
	
●employees that had annual compensation of 
more than $500,000 in the preceding year
Line 2 – Montana source interest. If you are 
a nonresident, enter the amount of your interest 
that you received from an installment sale of 
real property or tangible commercial or business 
personal property located in Montana. As a 
nonresident, you do not have to include as Montana 
source income any personal interest that you 
received on an account in a financial institution 
located in Montana, or from notes (other than for 
the installment sales or notes for loans made during 
the usual course of business in Montana).
If you are a part-year resident, enter all the 
interest that you received or accrued during the 
period you were a resident and that is included 
in the totals on Form 1040, line 2b, and on 
Schedule I, line 1.
If you are a Montana resident with a nonresident 
or part-year resident spouse, enter all interest 
income you received, the portion of interest 
received from a joint account, and any Montana 
source interest your spouse may have received 
as a resident of Montana.
Line 3 – Montana source ordinary dividends. 
If you are a nonresident, generally your dividends 
are not considered Montana source income and 
should not be included on this line.
If you are a part-year resident, enter all the 
dividends that you received or accrued during the 
period you were a Montana resident and that are 
included in your total on Form 1040, line 3b.
If you are a Montana resident with a nonresident 
or part-year resident spouse, enter all dividend 
income you received, the portion of dividend 
income received from a joint account, and any 
Montana source dividends your part-year resident 
spouse may have received.
Line 4 – Montana source refunds, credits, 
or offsets of local income tax. If you are a 
nonresident, part-year resident, or resident filing 
jointly with a nonresident or part-year resident 
spouse and have a taxable income tax refund or 
recovery of an amount deducted in a previous tax 
year that is reported on Form 1040, Schedule 1, 
line 10 or 25, enter that portion of your taxable 
refund and/or recovery that is determined to be 
Montana source income. Do not include any state 
income tax refund.
To determine that portion of your refund and/or 
recovery that is Montana source income, use 
the ratio of your Montana source income to 
total income that you reported in the year of 
the deduction. If you did not have any Montana 
source income and you were not required to file 
a Montana tax return, your income tax refund 
and/or recovery is not Montana source income.
Line 5 – Montana source alimony received. If 
you are a nonresident, the alimony you reported 
on Form 1040, Schedule 1, line 2a, is not Montana 
source income and is not taxable to Montana.
If you are a part-year resident or a Montana 
resident with a nonresident or part-year resident 
spouse, enter the amount of alimony received 
while located or as a resident of Montana that is 
included on f, line 2a.
Lines 6a through 6c – Montana source 
business income or (loss). These lines are 
used to report business income carried on in 
Montana as a sole proprietor or as a single 
member LLC. If you are a nonresident, you 
must complete Form DE prior to completing this 
schedule to apportion and allocate your Montana 
source income. If you are a part-year resident, 
complete Form DE for the time that you were 
a nonresident if you had any Montana source 
income during that period. See the instructions 
for Form DE for more information.
Residents filing jointly with a nonresident or 
part-year resident spouse do not complete Form 
DE because all income earned by a resident is 
considered Montana source income.
If you are a resident filing jointly with a 
nonresident or part-year resident, report all of 
your business income and any Montana source 
business income received by your nonresident or 
part-year resident spouse.


--- Page 34 ---

Page 26 of 43
2024 Montana Form 2 Instructions
On line 6b report any additional business 
expenses that are not included on your Form 
DE because they are reported as a federal 
adjustment on your Form 1040. These business 
expenses must be associated with the production 
of your Montana source business income. For 
example, you may report the proportion of the 
amount of federal self-employment taxes related 
to your Montana source business income.
Line 7 – Short-term capital gain or (loss). 
If you are nonresident, enter the Montana source 
short-term capital gains used to determine your 
net short-term capital gains reported on federal 
Schedule D, line 7.
Example: If you reported a net short-term capital 
loss of ($3,000) on Schedule D, line 7, which was 
the result of a short-term capital loss of ($13,000) 
from Oregon, and a short-term capital gain of 
$10,000 from Montana, you must report the 
$10,000 net short-term capital gain from Montana 
on this line.
If you are a part-year resident, enter all your 
gains or losses included in your net short-term 
capital gains or losses reported on federal 
Schedule D, line 7, received during the period 
you were a resident.
If you are a resident filing with a nonresident or 
part-year resident spouse, report all net short-term 
capital gains reported on Schedule D, line 7, and 
include any Montana source short-term capital 
gains or losses received by your spouse.
Your Montana source long-term capital losses 
may offset your Montana source short-term 
capital gains and vice versa. If you have a 
Montana source capital loss that offsets a 
Montana source short-term capital gain, report 
the remaining short-term capital gain on this line.
Line 8 – Montana source other gains or (losses). 
If you are a nonresident, enter the amount of gains 
or losses included in your total on Form 1040, 
Schedule 1, line 4, related to what you received 
from the sale or exchange of business property 
located in Montana. This gain is an ordinary gain as 
determined on your federal Form 4797.
If you are a part-year resident, enter all the gains 
and losses included in your total on Form 1040, 
Schedule 1, line 4, received during the part of the 
year that you were a resident. Also include, where 
applicable, any gains or losses from the sale or 
exchange of business property located in Montana 
during the period you were a nonresident.
Residents filing jointly with nonresident or part-
year resident spouses enter all of the resident’s 
gains and losses, regardless of where they were 
incurred, and any gains and losses received by 
the nonresident or part-year resident spouse that 
are sourced to Montana.
Line 9 – Montana source IRA, pensions, 
and annuities. If you are a nonresident, the 
IRA distributions on Form 1040, line 4b, and 
pensions and annuities included on Form 1040, 
line 5b, are not Montana source income and not 
taxable to Montana.
If you are a part-year resident, enter all the taxable 
IRA distributions from Form 1040, line 4b, and 
pensions and annuities included on Form 1040, 
line 5b, received during that part of the year that 
you were a resident.
If you are a resident filing jointly with a nonresident 
or part-year resident spouse, report all of your 
taxable IRA distributions from Form 1040, line 4b, 
and pensions and annuities included on Form 1040, 
line 5b. In addition, report any amounts received 
by your part-year resident spouse received while 
they were a resident. Do not report any Railroad 
Retirement Benefits that may be included on 
Form 1040, lines 4b and 5b.
Lines 10a through 10c – Montana source 
rental real estate, royalties, partnerships, 
S corporations, trusts, etc. If you are a 
nonresident, enter the following income or 
losses that you used to determine the total on 
Form 1040, Schedule 1, line 5:
	
●Net rental income or loss from real property 
and tangible property located in Montana
	
●Net royalties from real property and tangible 
personal property to the extent that this 
property is used in Montana
	
●Patent royalties to the extent that the 
income you received is for the production, 
fabrication, manufacturing, or other 
processing in Montana, or the patented 
product is produced in Montana
	
●Net copyright royalties to the extent 
that the printing and other publication 
originated in Montana
	
●Partnership and/or S corporation income 


--- Page 35 ---

Page 27 of 43
2024 Montana Form 2 Instructions
derived from a trade, business, occupation, 
or profession carried on in Montana. This is 
the amount reported as Total Montana Source 
Income on your Montana Schedules K-1. 
Do not include the gains or losses you report 
on lines 7, 8, and 22
	
●Montana source income from an estate or trust
If you are a part-year resident, enter all the 
income or losses included in your total on 
Form 1040, Schedule 1, line 5, received 
during the part of the year that you were a 
resident. Where applicable, include the portion 
of any income or loss attributable to Montana 
(as described in the preceding paragraph) during 
the period you were a nonresident.
Example: You are a part-year resident who was 
a resident of Montana for three months in 2024. 
You reported $12,000 from a partnership on your 
Form 1040, Schedule 1, line 5. You received 
a Montana Schedule K-1 from this partnership 
showing $5,000 of Montana source income on 
Part IV, Column B, line 14. The amount to report 
on line 10a is $6,750 ($3,000 from the three 
months of the year you were a resident, plus ¾ 
of the $5,000 ($3,750) for the nine months of the 
year you were a nonresident).
If you are a Montana resident filing jointly with a 
nonresident or part-year resident spouse report 
all of the income received from rental real estate, 
royalties, partnerships, S corporations, trusts, 
etc. and any Montana source income of your 
nonresident or part-year resident spouse.
On line 10b, you may report any expenses 
that are not included in the calculation of 
your business income that are related to 
the production of your business income. For 
example, you may report the proportion of your 
federal self-employment taxes associated with 
your Montana source business income.
Lines 11a through 11c – Montana source farm 
income or (loss). If you are a nonresident, enter 
the portion of your net income or loss reported 
on Form 1040, Schedule 1, line 6, received from 
farming activity carried on in Montana.
If you are a part-year resident, enter your 
net income or loss included in your total on 
Form 1040, Schedule 1, line 6, received from any 
farming activity during the period that you were 
a resident. Also include, where applicable, the 
portion of any net income or loss received from 
the farming activity carried on in Montana during 
the period you were a nonresident.
If you are a resident filing jointly with a 
nonresident or part-year resident, report all 
of your income from farming activity and any 
Montana source farming income received by your 
nonresident or part-year resident spouse.
On line 11b, you may report any expenses that 
are not included in the calculation of your business 
income that are related to the production of your 
business income. For example, you may report 
the proportion of your federal self-employment 
taxes associated with your Montana source 
business income.
Line 12 – Montana source taxable Social 
Security Benefits. If you are a nonresident, the 
taxable Social Security Benefits you reported 
on Form 1040, line 6b, are not Montana source 
income and not taxable to Montana.
If you are a part-year resident, enter only the portion 
of the taxable Social Security Benefits received 
during the part of the year you were a resident.
If you are a resident filing jointly with a 
nonresident or part-year resident spouse, enter 
all of your taxable Social Security Benefits 
included on Form 1040, line 6b. If you are filing 
with a part-year resident spouse, include any 
taxable Social Security Benefits received while 
the spouse was a resident.
Line 13 – Other income and adjustments to 
income. Enter other amounts of your income not 
included above that are derived from Montana 
sources. This includes, but is not limited to:
	
●Montana unemployment compensation
	
●Montana lottery winnings
	
●Any other type of Montana source income 
included on Form 1040, Schedule 1, Part I
Do not report net operating losses or excess 
business loss adjustments on this line. These 
amounts are not included in the numerator or 
denominator of the Montana source ordinary 
income ratio.
Report your total Montana source adjustments 
from a pass-through entity, estate, or trust 
from your Montana Schedules K-1, Part III. 
Subtract Column B, line 2, from Column B, line 1, 
and report the result here. This amount may be a 


--- Page 36 ---

Page 28 of 43
2024 Montana Form 2 Instructions
positive or a negative number.
If you are a resident filing jointly with a nonresident 
or part-year resident spouse, report the resident 
spouse’s subtractions on this line. Part-year residents 
only report those subtractions incurred during the 
year while a resident. Report these subtractions as a 
negative number.
Federal Adjustments to Income
Your Montana taxable income includes deductions 
taken on Form 1040, Schedule 1, Part II related 
to the production of your Montana source income. 
Voluntary expenses, such as contributions to 
a health savings account or contributions to 
an IRA, are not considered directly related to the 
production of Montana source income and do not 
result in an adjustment.
Do not report deductions directly related to 
the production of Montana source income on 
this line. Instead report those amounts on the 
line corresponding with the business income 
(lines 6b, 7b, and 11b).
Part-year residents enter deductions that reduce 
Montana source income during the period of the 
year you were a resident.
Residents filing jointly with nonresident or 
part-year resident spouses enter all deductions 
reported on Form 1040, Schedule 1, attributed to 
the resident spouse.
Example 1: You are an educator and a part-
year resident. You can reduce your Montana 
source wages derived from your activity as an 
educator by the portion of Educator Expenses 
allowed on Form 1040, Schedule 1, line 11, 
that is related to your Montana source wages 
received as an educator.
Example 2: You are a part-year resident 
and took an itemized deduction for interest 
expenses on your federal Schedule A. You can 
deduct the portion of interest expenses paid 
while a resident.
Line 14 – Montana source additions to income. 
Enter any amount of income not included above 
that you reported on your Schedule I derived from 
Montana sources. This includes, but is not limited to:
	
●If you received a refund or recovery income 
that is required to be included in Montana 
taxable income as an addition to federal 
taxable income, a portion of the addition 
may be considered Montana source income. 
To determine the amount, multiply it by the 
nonresident/part-year resident ratio of the 
year you took the deduction.
	
●Montana Medical Savings Account and 
Montana First-Time Homebuyer Account 
nonqualified withdrawals – include on this 
line the entire amount you reported on 
Schedule I, line 3.
If you are a resident filing jointly with a 
nonresident or part-year resident spouse, report 
all additions included on Schedule I.
Line 15 – Reserved.
Everywhere Ordinary Income
Line 17a. Enter your total income reported on 
Form 1040, line 9.
Line 17b. Combine Form 1040, Schedule 1, 
lines 8a and 8p, and the total adjustments to income 
that are directly related to any type of income that 
could be sourced to Montana. The adjustments to 
income that are directly related to any type of income 
that could be sourced to Montana are expenses 
found on Form 1040, Schedule 1, Part II, that are 
not included in the calculation of your business 
income that are related to the production of your 
business income. For example, you may report your 
federal self-employment taxes associated with your 
business income from all sources. These are items 
that are reported in proportion to what is reported on 
lines 6b, 10b, 11b, and 14.
Montana Source Net Long-Term 
Capital Gains Tax
Line 22 – Montana source net long-term 
capital gains. Report your Montana source 
net long-term capital gains. This is the amount 
of proceeds from the sale of an asset held in 
Montana for more than a year or an asset held 
while a Montana resident.


--- Page 37 ---

Page 29 of 43
2024 Montana Form 2 Instructions
Schedule III – Tax Credits
This schedule is used to report both nonrefundable 
and refundable Montana tax credits. Part I is used to 
report both nonrefundable and refundable tax credits.
Part II is to calculate the credit for income taxes 
paid to another state or country for taxes paid 
on Montana ordinary income and taxes paid on 
Montana net long-term capital gains.
Any expenses used to claim a Montana tax credit 
must be added back to federal taxable income on 
Schedule I, Part I, line 4.
Part I – Tax Credits
Nonrefundable Credits
Nonrefundable credits reduce the amount of tax 
you owe but cannot reduce your tax liability below 
zero. Some nonrefundable credits may be carried 
forward if the credit exceeds the current year 
liability to offset tax owed in a future year.
Line 1 – Credit for income taxes paid to another 
state or country. You can claim this credit only if 
you are a full-year resident or a part-year resident, 
and you paid income tax to another state or country 
on an item of income included in your Montana 
taxable income while a resident of Montana.
Compute the credit in Part II. You must complete 
a new page for each state or country for which 
you are claiming a credit. Include as many copies 
as needed. Complete Part I only once.
If you worked in North Dakota while a resident 
of Montana, the wages you receive for this 
work are not taxable by North Dakota under 
the income tax reciprocity agreement between 
the two states. If this applies to you, but your 
employer withheld North Dakota income tax 
from the wages, you cannot take this credit. 
Instead, you must file a North Dakota individual 
income tax return to obtain a refund of the 
North Dakota income tax withheld.
If you received income other than wages from 
North Dakota, you may be eligible for this credit 
if you pay income tax to North Dakota on the 
income that is not wages, provided that you earn 
or receive the income while a Montana resident.
Line 2 – Qualified Endowment Credit. You can 
claim a credit against your income tax liability 
for contributions made to a qualified Montana 
endowment held by a Montana corporation or 
established organization that is tax-exempt under 
IRC 501(c)(3) or is held by a bank or trust company 
in Montana on behalf of the tax-exempt organization.
The credit is equal to the lesser of 40 percent 
of the present value of a planned gift that you 
personally made during the year to a qualified 
Montana endowment or $15,000. If you are 
married filing jointly, you may claim the lesser of 
40 percent of the present value of each planned 
gift up to $30,000 if both spouses separately 
make a qualifying gift. The credit is nonrefundable 
and cannot be carried forward or back.
If you are a shareholder in an S corporation, a 
partner in a partnership, or a member or manager 
of a limited liability company, and your entity 
contributed to a qualified Montana endowment, 
you are entitled to the credit which is equal to the 
lesser of 20 percent of your share of the entity’s 
outright gift or 40 percent of your share of the 
entity’s planned gift or $15,000.
When claiming this credit, you must add back to 
federal taxable income any charitable deduction 
claimed on the federal Schedule A for the 
calculation you used to calculate this credit on 
Schedule I, Part I, line 5.
For further instructions on the Qualified 
Endowment Credit, and to calculate the credit, 
see Montana Form QEC. You must include a 
copy of this form if you claim this credit.
Line 3 – Recycle Credit. You may claim a credit 
against your income tax liability for the investment 
that your business makes in depreciable 
equipment or machinery that you use to collect, 
process, or manufacture a product from reclaimed 
material. Your credit is equal to 25 percent of the 
first $250,000 invested in the property, 15 percent 
of the next $250,000 in the property, and 5 percent 
of the next $500,000 invested. You are not entitled 
to any additional credit for the investment that 
exceeds $1 million. The credit is nonrefundable 
and cannot be carried forward or back.
For further instructions on the Recycle Credit, and 
to calculate the credit, see Montana Form RCYL. 
You must include a copy of this form if you claim 
this credit.


--- Page 38 ---

Page 30 of 43
2024 Montana Form 2 Instructions
Line 4 – Apprenticeship Credit. If you are a 
Montana employer who is a Montana Registered 
Apprenticeship Program sponsor, you may 
be eligible to receive a tax credit for any new 
position hired for on-the-job training.
The credit is equal to $750 for each new 
apprentice and $1,500 if the new apprentice 
is a veteran. The credit is available once the 
apprentice has completed a probationary period 
or after six months, whichever is earlier. The 
credit is nonrefundable and cannot be carried 
forward or back.
Employers must apply to Montana Department of 
Labor and Industry (DLI) to claim the credit. For 
more information visit https://apprenticeship.mt.gov/.
Attach a copy of the approval letter you receive 
from DLI if you claim this credit.
Line 5 – Trades Education and Training Credit. 
This credit is available to employers who incur 
expenses in providing education and training in 
an eligible trade profession to employees. The 
credit is equal to 50 percent of the cost of the 
qualifying trade profession education or training 
expenses, not to exceed $2,000 per employee 
and $25,000 total. The credit is nonrefundable 
and cannot be carried forward or back.
The credit is claimed in the year the cost is 
incurred. The employee must work or plan to 
work in Montana for at least 6 months of the year 
in which the education or training occurs.
For further instructions on the Trades Education 
and Training Credit, including the list of eligible 
trade professions, and to calculate the credit, see 
Montana Form TETC. You must include a copy of 
this form if you claim this credit.
Line 6 – Innovative Educational Program 
Credit. The Innovative Educational Program credit 
is available to taxpayers who donate to a Montana 
public school district for the purpose of providing 
supplemental funding for the district’s Innovative 
Educational Programs. The credit is equal to the 
donation up to $200,000. If you are married filing 
jointly you may claim the amount of each donation 
up to $400,000 if both spouses separately donate. 
Any excess may be carried forward for up to three 
years. The credit must be preapproved before a 
taxpayer may claim it. If preapproved, the public 
school district will provide you with a donation 
receipt, which you must include with your tax 
return. Enter the Credit Confirmation Code shown 
on your receipt on this line.
When claiming this credit, you must add back to 
federal taxable income any charitable deduction 
claimed on the federal Schedule A for the amount 
you used to calculate this credit on Schedule I, 
Part I, line 5.
Line 7 – Student Scholarship Organization 
Credit. The Student Scholarship Organization 
Credit is available to taxpayers who donate to 
approved Student Scholarship Organizations 
to provide scholarships for eligible students to 
attend instruction offered by a qualified education 
provider. The credit is equal to the donation up to 
$200,000. If you are married filing jointly you may 
claim the amount of each donation up to $400,000 
if both spouses separately make a donation. Any 
excess may be carried forward for up to three 
years. The credit must be preapproved before a 
taxpayer may claim it. If preapproved, the student 
scholarship organization will provide you with a 
donation receipt, which you must include with your 
tax return. Enter the Credit Confirmation Code 
shown on your receipt on this line.
When claiming this credit, you must add back to 
federal taxable income any charitable deduction 
claimed on the federal Schedule A for the amount 
you used to calculate this credit on Schedule I, 
