

--- Page 1 ---

INDIANA
2 0 2 4
IT-40
Full-Year Resident
Individual Income Tax Booklet
freefile.dor.in.gov  FAST • FRIENDLY • FREE


--- Page 2 ---

WAIT!
YOU MAY QUALIFY FOR FREE ONLINE TAX FILING!
The majority of Indiana taxpayers file electronically every year. Consider the benefits of filing electronically:
•	
Faster Refund. Electronic filing reduces errors and expedites refund time – within 10 to 14 days  
(compared with 10 to 12 weeks for a paper return).
•	
Fewer Errors. Up to 20 percent of paper-filed returns have errors, which can result in delays and possible 
penalty and/or interest for the taxpayer. Returns filed electronically, however, are 98 percent accurate.
•	
Easier Filing. You won’t have to complete the many complicated forms in this booklet. Instead, you go online, 
answer some easy questions, and before you know it your taxes are complete. 
You may be eligible to file your taxes online for FREE with INfreefile. Go to www.in.gov/dor/i-am-a/individual/infreefile 
to see if you qualify or learn more about INfreefile on page 4.
SP 265
(R25 / 9-24)


--- Page 3 ---

IT-40 Booklet 2024
Page 3
Which Indiana Tax Form Should You File?
Indiana has three different individual income tax returns. Read the 
following to find the right one for you to file.
Form IT-40 for Full-Year Residents
Use Form IT-40 if you (and your spouse, if married filing jointly) were 
full-year Indiana residents.
Form IT-40PNR for Part-Year and Full-Year 
Nonresidents
Use Form IT-40PNR if you (and your spouse, if married filing jointly):
	•
Were Indiana residents for less than a full-year or not at all, or
	•
Are filing jointly and one was a full-year Indiana resident and the 
other was not a full-year Indiana resident, and
	•
Do not qualify to file Form IT-40RNR.
Form IT-40RNR for Full-Year Residents of Reciprocal 
States
Use Form IT-40RNR if you (and your spouse, if married filing jointly) 
were:
	•
Full-year residents of Kentucky, Michigan, Ohio, Pennsylvania or 
Wisconsin, and
	•
The only type of income from Indiana was from wage, tip, salary 
or other compensation.* 
*You are required to file Form IT-40PNR if you have any other kind of 
Indiana-source income.
Note. If you have income that is being taxed by both Indiana and 
another state, you may have to file a tax return with the other state.
Military Personnel
See the instructions on page 7 to determine which form to file. 
Military personnel stationed in a combat zone should see the 
instructions on page 7 for extension of time to file procedures.
2024 Changes
Conformity Updates. Line 1 of Form IT-40 assumes conformity with 
the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended and in effect on Jan. 1, 
2023. If the 2025 Indiana General Assembly does not conform to the 
most current changes to the Internal Revenue Code, you may have to 
amend your tax return at a later date to reflect any differences between 
Indiana and federal law. You may wish to periodically check DOR’s 
homepage at www.in.gov/dor for updates.
Add-backs
	•
A new add-back, NOL Reduction Due to Debt Discharge (155), 
is being added for 2024 for purposes of reporting net operating 
loss carryforwards eliminated as a result of debt discharges. See 
page 14 for additional information.
Credits
	•
A new credit, ABLE 529A Account Credit (872), is available for 
contributors to Indiana ABLE Accounts. See page 39 for more 
information. 
	•
A new credit, Attainable Homeownership Tax Credit (875), is 
available for certain contributions to Habitat for Humanity of 
Indiana. See page 39 for additional information. 
	•
A new credit, Benefit Corporation Employment of Individuals 
with Disability Tax Credit (881), is available for benefit 
corporations who hire new employees with disabilities and 
are placed with the benefit corporations through a vocational 
rehabilitation program. See page 39 for additional information. 
	•
A new credit, Employer Child Care Expenditure Credit (876), is 
available for employers who make qualified expenditures related 
to the construction of child care facilities for employees’ children. 
See page 40 for additional information. 
	•
A new credit, Employment of Individuals with Disability Tax 
Credit (877), is available for employers who hire new employees 
with disabilities and are placed with the employer through a 
vocational rehabilitation program. See page 40 for additional 
information. 
	•
A new credit, Health Reimbursement Arrangement Credit 
(878), is available for certain employers who create health 
reimbursement arrangements for their employees in 2024 or later. 
See page 42 for additional information.
	•
A new credit, Historic Rehabilitation Tax Credit (879), is 
available for taxpayers who incur approved qualified rehabilitation 
expenditures for the restoration and preservation of qualified 
historic structures. See page 42 for additional information.
	•
A new credit, Physician Practice Ownership Credit (880), has 
been added for primary care physicians who own interests in 
newly-created entities that provide primary care services. See page 
44 for more details.
Deductions
	•
A new deduction, Health Care Sharing Ministry Deduction 
(643), has been added for payments made to health sharing 
ministries for membership in those ministries. See page 21 for 
more information.   
	•
For 2024, the deduction for active duty military compensation has 
been increased to 100% of compensation. See page 18 for more 
information.
Other Changes
	•
NOL Modifications. A new schedule, Schedule NOL-MOD, 
is available for 2024. This schedule allows for the current-year 
reporting of certain federal modifications to net operating losses, 
reporting of certain losses not directly reported on your return, 
and reduction of losses resulting from certain debt discharges.
	•
Schedule IN-OCC Form Changes. For 2024, Schedule IN-OCC 
includes a new Part B. Part B is used to report: 
	ο
Any credits that are being carried forward from previous years. 
	ο
Any credits that are not fully used and being carried forward 
to future years. 
	ο
Any credits that are not fully used, even if the credit is not 
available for future carryforward.


--- Page 4 ---

IT-40 Booklet 2024
Page 4
Need Tax Forms or Information Bulletins?
Use Your Personal Computer
Visit our website and download the forms you need. Our address for 
tax forms is www.in.gov/dor/tax-forms. Information Bulletins are 
available at www.in.gov/dor/resources/tax-library.
Visit a District Office
Some tax forms are available at district offices located throughout the 
state. These offices are open Monday - Friday, 8 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. local 
time. Visit www.in.gov/dor/about/district-offices for a list of these 
offices, including addresses and telephone numbers.
Need Help With Your Return?
INTIME e-Services Portal Available
INTIME, DOR’s e-services tax portal available at intime.dor.in.gov, 
provides the following functionalities for Individual customers:
	•
Make payments using a bank account or credit card
	•
View and respond to correspondence from DOR
	•
Request and print return transcripts on-demand
	•
Electronic delivery of correspondence
	•
Online customer service support through secure messaging
Increased Online Support for Tax Preparers
In addition to the functionality listed above, INTIME provides 
increased access and functionality for tax preparers. INTIME provides 
the following functionality for tax preparers: 
	•
Gain access to view and manage multiple customers under one 
login
	•
Ability to file returns, make payments, and view file and pay 
history for clients
	•
Request electronic power of attorney (ePOA) authorization to 
view customer accounts
	•
View and respond to correspondence for clients 
We strongly encourage all taxpayers to make payments and file returns 
electronically whenever possible. INTIME allows customers to make 
estimated payments electronically with just a few clicks.
Local Help
You may be eligible to take advantage of the IRS Volunteer Return 
Preparation Program (VRPP). This program offers free tax return 
help to low income, elderly and special needs individuals. Volunteers 
will fill out federal and state forms for those who qualify. Call the IRS 
at 1-800-829-1040 to find the nearest VRPP location. Be sure to take 
your W-2s, 1099s and a copy of last year’s state and federal tax returns. 
Information Line
Call the information line at 317-232-2240 to get the status of your 
refund, billing and payment plan information, a copy of your tax 
return, or prerecorded tax topics. If you wish to check for billing 
information, be sure to have a copy of your tax notice. The system will 
ask you to enter the tax identification number shown on the notice. To 
speak to a representative, please call during regular business hours, 8 
a.m. to 4:30 p.m., Monday - Friday.
Internet Address
If you need help deciding which form to file, or need to get 
information bulletins or policy directives on specific topics, visit our 
website at www.in.gov/dor.
Ready to File Your Return?
Use an Electronic Filing Program
A majority of Hoosier taxpayers use an electronic filing program 
to file their state and federal individual income tax returns every 
year. Electronic filing provides Indiana taxpayers the opportunity 
to file their federal and state tax returns immediately, and receive 
their Indiana refunds in about half the time it takes to process a 
paper return. It takes even less time if you use direct deposit, which 
deposits your refund directly into your bank account. Even if there 
is an amount due on either return, Indiana taxpayers can still file 
electronically and feel comfortable knowing that the returns were 
received by the IRS and the Indiana Department of Revenue (DOR). 
Use an electronic vendor or contact your tax preparer to see if he or 
she provides this service. 
INfreefile
This tax season Indiana continues to offer a free tax filing service 
through the cooperation of the Free File Alliance. Eligible Indiana 
taxpayers can file both the federal and Indiana individual tax returns 
using highly interactive and easy-to-use web-based applications that 
speed both returns and refunds. You can choose from a list of multiple 
vendors that provide this free service. DOR estimates nearly 2 million 
Indiana taxpayers are eligible for this free service. See if you are 
eligible by visiting www.in.gov/dor/i-am-a/individual/infreefile.
Our Website
Our website offers tax filing options, a Spanish version of the IT-40 
booklet with forms, downloadable blank forms and instructions, 
information bulletins, an online helpdesk, helpful email links and a 
calendar with filing due dates. Visit DOR’s website at www.in.gov/dor.
Moving?
Notify DOR if you move to a new address after filing your tax return, 
Change your address with us by doing one of the following:
	•
Use DOR’s e-services portal, the Indiana Taxpayer Information 
Management Engine (INTIME), to change your address at  
intime.dor.in.gov. INTIME offers customers the ability to manage 
their tax account(s) in one convenient location, 24/7.  
You can change your address by creating an INTIME log on. Once 
logged in, go to the “All Actions” tab and locate the “Update Name 
and Addresses” panel and select the “Addresses” tab.  
An INTIME User Guide for Individual Income Tax Customers is 
available at www.in.gov/dor/files/intime-individual-guide.pdf to 
help you through the process.
	•
Fax your request, including your Social Security number, old 
address, new address and signature, to 317-615-2608.
	•
Mail the request, including your Social Security number, old 
address, new address and signature, to Indiana Department of 
Revenue, P.O. Box 6197, Indianapolis, IN 46206-6197.
	•
Visit one of our District Offices (find locations here:  
www.in.gov/dor/about/district-offices) in person. Make sure to bring 
your Social Security number, old address, and new address with you.


--- Page 5 ---

IT-40 Booklet 2024
Page 5
Filing an Amended (Corrected) Tax Return
If you need to amend (correct) your 2024 individual income tax return 
after you initially filed:
	•
Prepare another IT-40 return that reflects all changes and check 
the “Amended” box on the front page. Failure to do so can delay 
processing.
	•
Include a copy of all required schedules reflecting all changes and 
documentation. Failure to do so can delay processing.
	•
File the amended return electronically, if possible.
Note. All amounts previously paid should be reported as an estimated 
payment. All refunds previously received should not be reported on an 
amended filing.
If you are filing an amended return for 2024 reporting additional tax 
and you previously received a refund, DOR will issue either a notice of 
proposed assessment or demand for payment to request repayment of 
the refund plus interest and penalty.
The Form IT-40 and supporting schedules are located at  
www.in.gov/dor/tax-forms/individual/current. For prior years,  
please see the instructions for that year.
Annual Public Hearing
In accordance with the Indiana Taxpayer Bill of Rights, DOR will conduct 
an annual public hearing in Indianapolis in June 2025. Event details will 
be listed at www.in.gov/dor/about/news-publications/public-hearings. 
Please come and share feedback or comments about how DOR can 
better administer Indiana tax laws. If not able to attend, please submit 
feedback or comments in writing to: Indiana Department of Revenue, 
Commissioner’s Office, MS# 101, 100 N. Senate Avenue, Indianapolis, 
IN 46204. Our homepage provides access to forms, information 
bulletins and directives, tax publications, email, and various filing 
options. Visit www.in.gov/dor.
Before You Begin
Important. You must complete your federal tax return first. 
Filling in the Boxes – Please Use Ink
If you are filling out the form by hand, please use black or blue ink and 
print your letters and numbers neatly within each box. If you do not 
have an entry for a particular line, leave it blank. Do not use dashes, 
zeros or other symbols to indicate that you have no entry for that line. 
Social Security Number 
Be sure to enter your full 9-digit Social Security number in the boxes 
at the top of the form. If filing a joint return, enter your Social Security 
number in the first set of boxes and your spouse’s full 9-digit Social 
Security number in the second set of boxes. An incorrect or missing 
Social Security number can increase your tax due, reduce your refund, 
or delay timely processing of your filing.
Individual Taxpayer Identification Number (ITIN)
If you already have an ITIN, enter it wherever your Social Security 
number is requested on your tax return. If you are in the process of 
applying for an ITIN, check the box located directly beneath the Social 
Security number area at the top of the form. For information on how 
to get an ITIN, contact the IRS at 1-800-829-3676 and request federal 
Form W-7, or find it online at www.irs.gov.
Name and Suffix
Please use all capital letters when entering your information. For 
example, Jim Smith Junior should be entered as JIM SMITH JR.
Name. If your last name includes an apostrophe, do not use it. For 
example, enter O’Shea as OSHEA. If your name includes a hyphen, use 
it. For example, enter SMITH-JONES.
Suffix. Enter the suffix associated with your name in the appropriate 
box. 
	•
Use JR for junior and SR for senior.
	•
Numeric characters must be replaced by alphabetic Roman 
Numerals. For example, if your last name is Charles 3rd, do not 
use 3rd; instead, enter III in the suffix field.
	•
Do not enter any titles or designations, such as M.D., Ph. D., RET., 
Minor or DEC’D.
Married Filing Requirements
	•
Married Filing Jointly
If you filed your federal income tax return as married filing 
jointly, you also must file married filing jointly with Indiana.
	•
Married Filing Separately
If you file your federal income tax return as married filing 
separately, you must also file as married filing separately with 
Indiana. Enter both of your Social Security numbers in the 
boxes on the top of the form, and then check the box directly to 
the right of those boxes. Enter the name of the person filing the 
return on the top line, but do not enter the spouse’s name on the 
second name line. 
	•
Married Persons Who Live Apart Filing Status
If you were not divorced or legally separated during the tax year 
you may have qualified for and filed as ‘head of household’ on 
your federal income tax return. If you did, do not check the 
married filing separately box. Also, do not enter either your 
spouse’s name or Social Security number.
Military Address
Overseas military addresses must contain the APO, FPO designation 
in the “city” field along with a two-character “state” abbreviation of 
AE, AP, or AA and the ZIP code. Place these two- and three-letter 
designations in the city name area.
ZIP/Postal Code
Enter your five- or nine-digit ZIP code (do not use a dash). For 
example, enter 46217 or 462174540. If filing with a foreign address, 
enter the associated postal code.
Foreign Country Code
Complete this area if the address you are using is located in a foreign 
country. Enter the 2-character foreign country code, which may be 
found online at  
www.in.gov/dor/resources/tax-library/foreign-country-code-listing.


--- Page 6 ---

IT-40 Booklet 2024
Page 6
County Information
Enter the two-digit code numbers for the county(s) where you and 
your spouse, if filing jointly, lived and worked on Jan. 1, 2024. You 
can find these code numbers on the chart found on the back of 
Schedule CT-40. See the instructions beginning on page 51 for 
more information, including the definitions of the county where 
you live and work, details for military personnel, retired individuals, 
homemakers, unemployed individuals, out-of-state filers, etc.
Refund Check Address
Your refund check will be issued in the name(s), address and Social 
Security number(s) shown on your tax return. It is very important that 
this information is correct and legible. Any wrong information will 
delay your refund.
Rounding Required
Each line on which an amount can be entered has “.00” already filled 
in. This is to let you know that rounding is required when completing 
your tax return.
You must round your amounts to the nearest whole dollar.
To do this, drop amounts of less than $0.50.
Example. $432.49 rounds down to $432.00.
Increase amounts of $0.50 or more to the next higher dollar.
Example. $432.50 rounds up to $433.00. 
Losses or Negative Entries
When reporting a loss or negative entry, use a negative sign.
Example. Write a $125 loss as -125.
Commas
Do not use commas when entering amounts. For instance, express 
1,000 as 1000.
Enclosing Schedules, W-2s, Etc.
Use only DOR-issued or DOR-permitted forms and schedules. Failure 
to use correct forms and schedules could result in disallowance of 
deductions or credits and will delay processing your return. You will 
find an enclosure sequence number in the upper right-hand corner 
of each schedule. Make sure to put your completed schedules in 
sequential order behind the IT-40 when assembling your tax return. 
Do not staple or paper clip your enclosures. If you have a schedule 
on which you’ve made no entry, do not enclose it unless you have 
completed information on the back of it.
Also, enclose: 
	•
All W-2s, 1099s, Forms IN-MSID-A and IN K-1s on which 
Indiana state and/or county tax withholding amounts appear
	•
All IN K-1s on which pass through entity tax amounts appear
	•
All 1099Gs showing unemployment compensation
	•
A check/money order, if applicable
A note about your W-2s. It is important that your W-2 form is 
readable. The income and state and county tax amounts withheld are 
verified on every W-2 form that comes in with your tax return. We 
encourage you to enclose the best copy available when you file.
Who Should File?
You may need to file an Indiana income tax return if:
	•
You lived in Indiana and received income, or
	•
You lived outside Indiana and had any income from Indiana.
Filing Status Requirement. If you and your spouse file a joint federal 
tax return, you must file a joint tax return with Indiana. If you and 
your spouse file separate federal tax returns, you must file separate tax 
returns with Indiana.
Note. There are three types of Indiana tax returns available. The type 
you need to file is generally based on your residency status. Read the 
following to decide if you are a full-year resident, part-year resident, or 
nonresident of Indiana, and which type of return you should file.
Full-Year Residents
If you were a full-year resident of Indiana and your gross income (the 
total of all your income before deductions) was greater than certain 
exemptions*, you must file an Indiana tax return. 
Full-year residents must file Form IT-40, Indiana Full-Year Resident 
Individual Income Tax.
You are a full-year Indiana resident if you maintain your legal 
residence in Indiana from Jan. 1 – Dec. 31 of the tax year. You 
do not have to be physically present in Indiana the entire year to 
be considered a full-year resident. Residents, including military 
personnel, who leave Indiana for a temporary stay, are considered 
residents during their absence.
Retired persons spending part of the year in another state may still be 
full-year residents if:
	•
They maintain their legal residence in Indiana and intend to 
return to Indiana during part of the taxable year
	•
They retain their Indiana driver’s license
	•
They retain their Indiana voting rights
	•
They claim a homestead deduction on their Indiana home for 
property tax purposes
* To figure your exemptions for filing requirement purposes, Indiana 
allows a $1,000 exemption for you and a $1,000 exemption for your 
spouse (if married filing jointly). You also get a $1,000 exemption 
for each dependent you are eligible to claim. See instructions 
beginning on page 24 for additional information concerning how 
to figure your dependents. If your gross income is less than your total 
exemptions figured above, you are not required to file. However, you 
may want to file a return to get a refund of any state and/or county 
tax withheld by your employer, or other refundable credits, such as an 
earned income credit or estimated tax payment.
Part-Year Residents and Full-Year Nonresidents
If you were a part-year resident and received income while you lived 
in Indiana, you must file Indiana Form IT-40PNR, Part-Year Resident 
or Nonresident Individual Income Tax Return. 
If you were a legal resident of another state(s) (exception: see next 
paragraph) and had income from Indiana (except certain interest, 
dividends, or retirement income), you must file Form IT-40PNR.


--- Page 7 ---

IT-40 Booklet 2024
Page 7
Full-Year Residents of Kentucky, Michigan, Ohio, 
Pennsylvania or Wisconsin
If you were a full-year resident of Kentucky, Michigan, Ohio, 
Pennsylvania or Wisconsin, and your only income from Indiana was 
from wages, salaries, tips or commissions, then you need to file Form 
IT-40RNR, Indiana Reciprocal Nonresident Individual Income Tax 
Return.
Deceased Taxpayers
If an individual died during 2024, or died after Dec. 31, 2024, but 
before filing his/her tax return, the executor, administrator or 
surviving spouse must file a tax return for the individual if:
	•
The deceased was under the age of 65 and had gross income more 
than $1,000
	•
The deceased was age 65 or older and had gross income more 
than $2,000, or
	•
The deceased was a nonresident and had gross income from Indiana.
Be sure to enter the month and day of death for the taxpayer or spouse 
in the appropriate box located on Schedule 7. For example, a date of 
death of Jan. 9, 2024, would be entered as 01/09/2024. 
Note. The date of death should not be entered here if the individual 
died after Dec. 31, 2024, but before filing the tax return. The date of 
death information will be shown on the individual’s 2025 tax return.
Signing the Deceased Individual’s Tax Return
If a joint return is filed by the surviving spouse, the surviving spouse 
should sign his or her own name and after the signature write: “Filing 
as Surviving Spouse.”
An executor or administrator appointed to the deceased’s estate must 
file and sign the return (even if this isn’t the final return), indicating 
their relationship after their signature (e.g. administrator). 
If there is no executor, or if an administrator has not been appointed, 
the person filing the return should sign and give their relationship to 
the deceased (e.g. “John Doe, nephew”). Only one tax return should be 
filed on behalf of the deceased. 
Note. DOR may ask for a copy of the death certificate, so please keep a 
copy with your records.
Refund Check for a Deceased Individual
If you (the surviving spouse, administrator, executor or other) 
have received a refund check and cannot cash it, contact the State 
Comptroller at www.in.gov/comptroller/contact-us to get a widow’s 
and distributee’s affidavit (POA-20) or a reissuance of refund (IN-
1310). Send the completed form, the refund check and a copy of the 
death certificate to the State Comptroller so a refund check can be 
issued to you.
Military Personnel — Residency
If you were an Indiana resident when you enlisted, you remain an 
Indiana resident no matter where you are stationed. You must report 
all your income to Indiana on Form IT-40.
If you changed your legal residence (military home of record) during 
the tax year, you are a part-year resident and should file Form IT-
40PNR. You must also enclose a copy of Military Form DD-2058 with 
the tax return. As an Indiana part-year resident you will be taxed on 
the income you earned while you were a resident of Indiana, plus any 
income from Indiana sources.
If you are stationed in Indiana and you are a resident of another state, 
you won’t need to file with Indiana unless you have non-military 
income from Indiana sources.
Example. Annie, who is a Kansas resident, is stationed in Indiana. She 
earned $1,300 from her Indiana part-time job. She will need to report 
that income to Indiana on Form IT-40PNR.
If you are a full-year Indiana resident in the military, your spouse is a 
legal resident of another state and you filed a joint federal return, you 
will need to file Form IT-40PNR.
Important. Refer to the instructions on page 51 for an explanation 
of county of residence for military personnel.
When Should You File?
Your tax return is due April 15, 2025. If you file after this date and owe 
tax, you will owe interest on the unpaid amount and you may owe 
penalty, too. See page 11 for more information.
Fiscal year tax returns are due by the fifteenth (15) day of the fourth 
(4th) month after the close of the fiscal year. You must complete the 
fiscal year filing period information at the top of the Form IT-40.
Extension of Time to File — What if You Can’t File on 
Time?
You must get an extension of time to file if you:
	•
Are required to file, and
	•
You cannot file your tax return by the April 15, 2025, due date. 
Whether you owe additional tax, are due a refund, or are breaking 
even, you still need to get an extension if filing after April 15, 2025. 
Note. Indiana’s Application for Extension of Time to File, Form IT-9, 
extends the filing date to Nov. 17, 2025.
If You Owe…
Option 1. File Indiana’s Application for Extension of Time to File, 
Form IT-9. This must be filed by April 15, 2025, for the extension 
request to be valid. 
Note. You may file Indiana’s Application for Extension of Time to File 
online if you make a payment with it by April 15, 2025. Pay electronically 
using DOR’s e-services portal, the Indiana Taxpayer Information 
Management Engine (INTIME), by visiting intime.dor.in.gov. INTIME 
offers customers the ability to manage their accounts in one convenient 
location, 24/7. 
Option 2. Filing for a federal application for extension of time to file 
with the IRS will automatically provide for a state extension of time to 
file. You must file your state tax return by Nov. 17, 2025, paying any 
balance due with that filing. 


--- Page 8 ---

IT-40 Booklet 2024
Page 8
While interest is due on any amount paid after the original April 15 due 
date, penalty will be waived if both of the following conditions are met:
	•
The remaining balance due is paid in full by Nov. 17, 2025, and 
	•
You paid at least 90% of the tax expected to be owed by the 
original April 15 due date.
If You Don’t Owe…
You’ll need to file for an extension if:
	•
You are due a refund, or
	•
You don’t expect to owe any tax when filing your tax return, and
	•
You are unable to file your return by April 15, 2025.
There are two ways to accomplish this:
	•
If you have a federal extension (you filed Form 4868, or made 
an extension payment via an electronic filing method), you 
automatically have an extension with Indiana and do not have to 
file for a separate state extension (Form IT-9).
	•
If you do not have a federal extension, file Form IT-9 by April 15, 2025.
Extension Filing Deadline
Both state Form IT-9 and federal Form 4868 extend your state filing 
time to Nov. 17, 2025.
Will You Owe Penalty and/or Interest?
Penalty will not be owed if you have:
	•
Paid 90% of the tax you expect to owe by April 15, 2025,
	•
Filed your tax return by Nov. 17, 2025, and
	•
Paid any remaining amount due (including interest) with that filing.
Interest is owed on all amounts paid after April 15, 2025. See page 
11 for instructions on how to figure interest.
Indiana’s Extension of Time to File, Form IT-9
Pay electronically using DOR’s e-services portal, the Indiana Taxpayer 
Information Management Engine (INTIME), by visiting intime.dor.in.gov.  
INTIME offers customers the ability to manage their accounts in one 
convenient location, 24/7. Alternatively, you may access Form IT-9 
online at www.in.gov/dor/tax-forms/individual/current. You may file 
Indiana’s Application for Extension of Time to File online if you make 
a payment with it by April 15, 2025. 
Where to Report Your Extension Payment
Add your state extension payment to any estimated tax paid. Report 
the total on Schedule 5, line 4. 
Military personnel on duty outside of the United States and Puerto 
Rico on the filing due date are allowed an automatic 60 day extension of 
time to file. A statement must be enclosed with the return verifying that 
you were outside of the United States or Puerto Rico on April 15, 2025.
Military personnel in a presidentially declared combat zone have an 
automatic extension of 180 days after they leave the combat zone. In 
addition, if they are hospitalized outside the United States because of 
such service, the 180-day extension period begins after being released 
from the hospital. The spouse of such service member must use the 
same method of filing for both federal and Indiana (e.g. single or 
joint). When filing the return, write “Combat Zone” across the top of 
the form (above your Social Security number).
Form IT-40: Line-by-line Instructions
Important. You must complete your federal income tax return, Form 
1040/1040-SR, before starting your Indiana income tax return. Line 
numbers from your federal income tax return are referenced in many 
of the following instructions. While every effort has been made to 
make the instructions as clear as possible, sometimes the line numbers 
change on the federal income tax return after the Indiana forms are 
finalized. Please contact us if you are unsure as to whether or not you 
are looking at the correct line on your federal income tax return (see 
page 4 of this booklet for contact information).
When Not to Fill In a Line
If you do not have an entry for a particular line, leave it blank. Do not 
use dashes, zeros or other symbols to indicate that you have no entry 
for that line. 
Line 1 – Federal Adjusted Gross Income
Enter the adjusted gross income from your federal Form 1040/1040-
SR, line 11. If you were not required to file a federal return, complete a 
“sample” federal return and report the amount you would have shown 
on your federal return if you had been required to file. 
When reporting a loss or negative entry, use a negative sign.
Example. Write a $125 loss as -125.
Line 2 – Add-Backs
Enter on this line any add-backs from Schedule 1: Add-Backs. 
Instructions for Schedule 1 begin on page 12. Make sure to enclose 
Schedule 1 when filing.
Line 4 – Deductions
Enter on this line any deductions from Schedule 2: Deductions. 
Instructions for Schedule 2 begin on page 16. Make sure to enclose 
Schedule 2 when filing.
Line 6 – Exemptions
Enter any exemptions from Schedule 3: Exemptions on this line. 
Instructions for Schedule 3 begin on page 24. Make sure to enclose 
Schedule 3 when filing.
Line 9 – County Tax 
Complete Schedule CT-40 to figure your county tax and enter it here. 
Instructions for Schedule CT-40 begin on page 51. Make sure to 
enclose Schedule CT-40 when filing.
Line 10 – Other Taxes
Enter any other taxes from Schedule 4: Other Taxes on this line. 
Instructions for Schedule 4 begin on page 29. Make sure to enclose 
Schedule 4 when filing.
Line 12 – Credits
Enter your credits from Schedule 5: Credits on this line. Instructions 
for Schedule 5 begin on page 29. Make sure to enclose Schedule 5 
when filing.


--- Page 9 ---

IT-40 Booklet 2024
Page 9
Line 13 – Offset Credits
Enter the total of any offset credits reported on Schedule 6: Offset 
Credits on this line. Instructions for Schedule 6 begin on page 36. 
Make sure to enclose Schedule 6 when filing.
Line 17 – Donation Check-Offs
Enter on this line the total of any donations made on Schedule IN-
DONATE. Make sure to enclose Schedule IN-DONATE, which is 
located at the bottom of Schedule 5: Credits, when filing. See page 
35 for more information.
Line 19 – Amount to be Applied as a 2025 Estimated 
Tax Installment Payment
You should pay estimated tax during the 2025 tax year if:
	•
You have income that will not be subject to Indiana tax 
withholding, or
	•
You think the amount withheld will not be enough to pay your tax 
liability, and
	•
You expect to owe more than $1,000 when you file your tax 
return.
The simplest and most efficient way to pay quarterly estimated taxes 
is by using INTIME at intime.dor.in.gov. INTIME offers a quick, safe 
and secure way to submit estimated payments, while providing the 
option to schedule payments and view payment history. By using 
this method, customers receive a confirmation number immediately 
without having to wait for mail to arrive or checks to clear.
INTIME also provides the option to schedule all four estimated 
payments, up to a year in advance, to avoid penalties and never miss 
a deadline again. Any awaiting payment(s) in INTIME will remain 
“pending” until the scheduled payment date enabling customers to 
make changes or cancel at any time leading up to that date. 
Instructions on how to make estimated payments using INTIME 
are available in the INTIME User Guide for Individual Income Tax 
Customers at www.in.gov/dor/files/intime-individual-guide.pdf.
Beginning in 2024, if you file your individual return electronically, 
DOR will accept direct debit of up to four estimated payments.
Alternatively, you may visit www.in.gov/dor/tax-forms/individual/current 
to get Form ES-40. Use the worksheet on Form ES-40 to see how much 
you will owe. Then, if you have an overpayment showing on line 18 of 
your tax return, you can have some or all of the overpayment applied 
to next year’s estimated tax account. To do so, enter any portion of the 
overpayment:
	•
On line a, if you want to apply an amount to offset estimated 
county tax due (from Form ES-40 worksheet, line K). Also, enter 
the 2-digit county code from line K; and/or 
	•
On line b, if your spouse lived in a different county than you did 
on Jan. 1, 2025, and you want to apply an amount to offset your 
spouse’s estimated county tax due (from Form ES-40 worksheet, 
line L). Also, enter the 2-digit county code from line L; and/or 
	•
On line c, if you want to apply an amount to offset your estimated 
state tax due (from Form ES-40 worksheet, line J).
Example. Mark and Megan have a $420 overpayment, and want to 
apply $300 of it to their 2025 estimated tax account. Their worksheet 
from Form ES-40 has the following breakdown:
	•
Line I (each installment payment) is $300;
	•
Line J (portion that represents state tax due) is $270; and
	•
Line K (portion that represents county tax due) is $30.
They will enter $30 on line 19a (along with their 2-digit county code), 
$270 on line 19c, and the $300 total amount to be applied will be 
entered on line 19d. They will get a $120 refund ($420 overpayment 
minus $300 applied to their 2025 estimated tax account).
Example. Stu wants to pay $500 in estimated tax for each installment 
period. He has a $30 overpayment on his tax return. He chooses to 
enter the full $30 overpayment on line 19c (Indiana adjusted gross 
income tax amount), and carries it to line 19d. (He may pay the $470 
additional amount by using INTIME to make a secure electronic 
payment, or by printing Form ES-40 and filing it along with a check or 
money order.)
Important. Estimated tax installment payments made for the 2025 tax 
year are due by:
	•
April 15, 2025 (1st installment)
	•
June 16, 2025 (2nd installment)
	•
Sept. 15, 2025 (3rd installment)
	•
Jan. 15, 2026 (4th installment)
Any installment payment amount entered on line 19d will be 
considered to be paid on the day your tax return is filed (postmarked). 
For instance, an installment payment shown on a return filed on: April 
15, 2025, will be considered to be a 2025 first installment payment; 
June 3, 2025, will be considered to be a 2025 second installment 
payment; and July 22, 2025, will be considered to be a 2025 third 
installment payment. 
Note. You may complete and mail the ES-40, Estimated Tax Payment 
form, along with your payment to DOR’s return address on the form. 
Estimated payments can also be made online with an electronic bank 
payment (ACH/e-check) or Visa, MasterCard and Discover debit or 
credit cards by using DOR’s e-services portal, the Indiana Taxpayer 
Information Management Engine (INTIME), at intime.dor.in.gov. See 
line 26 instructions on page 11 for details about payment options.
See Income Tax Information Bulletin #3 at  
www.in.gov/dor/files/ib03.pdf for additional information  
about estimated taxes.
Line 20 – Penalty for Underpayment of Estimated Tax
You might owe a penalty for the underpayment of estimated tax if you 
did not have taxes withheld from your income and/or you did not pay 
enough estimated tax throughout the year. 
In fact, not properly paying estimated tax is one of the most common 
errors made in filing Indiana tax returns. Generally, if you owe $1,000 
or more in state and county tax for the year that’s not covered by 
withholding taxes, you need to be making estimated tax payments.


--- Page 10 ---

IT-40 Booklet 2024
Page 10
You might owe this penalty if:
	•
The total of your credits, including timely made estimated tax 
payments, is less than 90% of this year’s tax due or 100% of last 
year’s tax due, ** or
	•
You underpaid the minimum amount due for one or more of the 
installment periods.
If either of these cases apply to you, you must complete Schedule 
IT-2210 or IT-2210A to see if you owe a penalty or if you meet an 
exception.
	•
If you owe this penalty, complete Schedule IT-2210 or IT-2210A 
and write the penalty amount on Form IT-40, line 20. 
	•
If you meet an exception, complete Schedule IT-2210 or IT-2210A 
to show which exception was met.
Include the completed form with your submission. 
*You must have timely paid 100% of lines 8 and 9 of your 2023 IT-40 
or IT-40PNR. Note: If last year’s Federal adjusted gross income was 
more than $150,000 ($75,000 for married filing separately), you must 
pay 110% of last year’s tax (instead of 100%) to meet this exception.
**Farmers and fishermen should see the special instructions on page 
10.
Important. DOR will compute and assess the underpayment penalty 
where appropriate based on filing history and tax due.
Should You Use Schedule IT-2210 or Schedule IT-2210A?
Schedule IT-2210 should be used by individuals who receive income 
(not subject to withholding tax) on a fairly even basis throughout the 
year. This schedule will help determine whether a penalty is due, or 
whether an exception to the penalty has been met.
Example. Jim and Sarah together received $4,500 in pension income 
each month. Since their income is received on a fairly even basis, they’ll 
use Schedule IT-2210 to figure their penalty or exception to the penalty.
Farmers and fishermen have special filing considerations. If at least 
two-thirds of your gross income is from farming or fishing, complete 
Schedule IT-2210, using the Section D Short Method.
Schedule IT-2210A may be used by individuals who receive income 
(not subject to withholding tax) unevenly during the year. Also use 
this form if you had substantial changes in withholding during the 
year. See Income Tax Information Bulletin #3 available at  
www.in.gov/dor/files/ib03.pdf for further information. This schedule 
will help determine whether a penalty is due, or whether an exception 
to the penalty has been met. 
Example. Bill’s income is from selling fireworks in June and July. He 
will want to figure any penalty due on Schedule IT-2210A, which may 
exempt him from having had to pay estimated tax on the April 15, 
2024, first installment due date.
Example. Rachael received a sizable lump sum distribution in Dec. of 
2024. She figured how much estimated tax was due, and paid it in full 
by the Jan. 15, 2025, fourth period installment due date. By completing 
Schedule IT-2210A, she shows she owes no penalty for the first three 
installment periods, and that a proper payment was made for the 
fourth installment period. She will owe no penalty. 
Farmers and Fishermen.
Special options are available if more than two-thirds of your gross 
income for 2023 and/or 2024 was from farming or fishing. 
Option 1. Pay your estimated tax in one payment on or before Jan. 16, 
2025, and file your tax return by April 15, 2025; or
Option 2. Make no estimated tax payment and file your tax return and 
pay all the tax due by March 3, 2025.
Example. More than two-thirds of Henry’s gross income is from 
farming. He should complete Schedule IT-2210. Henry will be able 
to use the Section D Short Method to figure his penalty or to show he 
meets an exception to owing a penalty.
Example. Henry had two-thirds of his income for 2022 from farming. 
In 2023 and 2024, Henry had less than two-thirds of his income from 
farming or fishing. Henry can use the special option for farmers or 
fisherman for 2023 because two-thirds of his previous-year income 
(2022) was from farming or fishing. Henry cannot use the special 
option for 2024 because less than two-thirds of his income for both 
2023 and 2024 was from farming or fishing.
Visit our website at www.in.gov/dor/tax-forms/individual/current to 
get Schedule IT-2210 or Schedule IT-2210A.
Line 20a
Enter Code A if you are computing your penalty using Form IT-2210A. 
Enter Code F if you are reporting estimated tax as a farmer or a fisherman.
Line 21 – Refund
You have a refund if line 18 is greater than the combined amounts 
entered on lines 19d and 20. 
Important. If the combination of line 19d plus line 20 is greater than 
the amount on line 18, you must make an adjustment. The estimated 
tax carryover amount on line 19d is limited; it cannot be greater than 
the remainder of line 18 minus line 20. See the second example about 
Stu under the Line 19 instructions on page 9.
A Note About Refund Offsets
Indiana law requires that money you owe to the state, its agencies, 
and certain federal agencies, be deducted from your refund or credit 
before a refund is issued. This includes money owed for past-due 
taxes, student loans, child support, SNAP benefits or an IRS levy. If 
DOR applies your refund to any of these debts, you will receive a letter 
explaining the situation.
When to Expect Your Refund
Generally, 10 to 14 business days is the average wait for a refund if 
the tax return is electronically filed; it can take up to 12 weeks for the 
refund to be issued if you mail a paper tax return.
A refund may take longer under certain circumstances. The most 
common incidents are when businesses supply withholding statements 
(such as W-2, 1099-R, Schedule IN K-1, etc.) late and when the return 
reports a Schedule C loss.


--- Page 11 ---

IT-40 Booklet 2024
Page 11
Where’s Your Refund?
There are several ways to check the status of your refund. You will 
need to know the exact amount of your refund, and a Social Security 
number entered on your tax return. Then, do one of the following:
	•
Go to www.in.gov/dor/i-am-a/individual/check-refund and click 
Check the Status of Your Refund.
	•
Call 317-232-2240 for automated refund information; to speak to 
a representative, please call during regular business hours, 8 a.m. 
to 4:30 p.m., Monday - Friday.
	•
Go to INTIME at intime.dor.in.gov and click “Where’s my refund?”
A refund directly deposited to your bank account may be listed on 
your bank statement as a credit, deposit, etc. If you have received 
information from DOR that your refund has been issued, and you are 
not sure if it has been deposited in your bank account, call the ACH 
Section of your bank or financial institution for clarification.
Important. If we are unable to deposit your refund to the listed 
account (incorrect/incomplete account numbers; account closed; 
refund to go to an account outside the United States; etc.), DOR will 
mail a paper check to the address on the front of the tax form.
Note. A refund deposited directly to your Hoosier Works MasterCard 
account will appear on your monthly statement.
Statute of Limitations for Refund Claims
There is a statute of limitations when filing for a refund of overpaid 
taxes for tax year 2024. In general, a claim for refund must be made 
by April 18, 2028 (Nov. 15, 2028 if filing under extension). The claim 
for refund is considered to be made on the day your tax return 
is postmarked. If you file your 2024 tax return after the statute of 
limitations has expired, no refund will be issued.
Line 22 – Direct Deposit
You may choose to have your refund deposited in your checking, savings 
or Hoosier Works Master Card account. If you want your refund directed 
into your checking or savings account, complete lines 22 a, b, c and d.
Caution. If you choose this option, make sure to verify the account 
information after you have entered it. This will help ensure your 
refund is deposited into your desired account. 
The routing number is nine digits, with the first two digits of the 
number beginning with 01 through 12 or 21 through 32. Do not use a 
deposit slip to verify the number because it may have internal codes as 
part of the actual routing number. 
The account number can be up to 17 digits. Omit any hyphens, accents 
and special symbols. Enter the number from left to right and leave any 
unused boxes blank. 
Check the appropriate box for the type of account you are making 
your deposit to: either a checking account or savings account.
To comply with banking rules, you must place an X in the box on line 
d if your refund is going to an account outside the United States. If you 
check the box, we will mail you a paper check.
If you currently have a Hoosier Works MasterCard and wish to have 
your refund directly deposited in your account, enter your 12-digit 
account number on line 22b, where it says “Account Number” (do 
not write anything on line 22a “Routing Number”). You can find 
your 12-digit account number in the upper right-hand corner of your 
account monthly statement.
Note. DO NOT use your MasterCard 16-digit number. Make sure to 
check the “Hoosier Works MC” box on line 22c. 
For more information on direct deposit, please see “Where’s Your 
Refund?” on page 11.
Line 23
If line 21 is less than zero, you have an amount due. Enter here as a 
positive number and skip to line 24.
OR
If line 15 is greater than line 14, complete the following steps:
Subtract line 14 from line 15 and enter the total here... A___________
Enter any amount from line 20..........................................B___________
Add lines A + B. Enter total here and on line 23.............C___________
Line 24 – Penalty
You may owe a penalty if your tax return is filed after the April 15, 
2025, due date and you have an amount due. Penalty is 10% of the 
amount due (line 23 minus line 20) or $5, whichever is greater. 
Exception. No penalty will be due if you have:
	•
An extension of time to file,
	•
Are filing and paying the remaining tax due by the extended filing 
due date, and
	•
Have prepaid at least 90% of the amount due by April 15, 2025.
Line 25 – Interest
You will owe interest (even if you have an extension of time to file) 
if your tax return is filed after the April 15, 2025, due date and you 
have an amount due. Interest should be figured on the sum of line 23 
minus line 20. Contact DOR at 317-232-2240 or visit our website at 
www.in.gov/dor/files/dn03.pdf to get Departmental Notice #3 for the 
current interest rate.
Line 26 – Amount Due – Payment Options
There are several ways to pay the amount you owe.
Electronic payments can be made via DOR’s e-service portal, the 
Indiana Taxpayer Information Management Engine (INTIME), at 
intime.dor.in.gov. INTIME offers customers the ability to manage their 
accounts in one convenient location, 24/7. Accepted forms of payment 
via INTIME include electronic bank payment (ACH/e-check), Visa, 
MasterCard and Discover debit or credit cards. No fees are assessed for 
electronic bank payments. Fees apply to payments made with credit or 
debit cards. You do not need to logon to INTIME to make payments. 
Simply select the “Make a Payment” option on the page. An INTIME 
User Guide for Individual Income Tax Customers is available at  
www.in.gov/dor/files/intime-individual-guide.pdf to help you  
through the process. 


--- Page 12 ---

IT-40 Booklet 2024
Page 12
Another option is to mail your payment to: 
Indiana Department of Revenue 
P.O. Box 7224 
Indianapolis, IN 46207-7224
You may pay in person at one of DOR’s district offices with cash, but 
with the exact amount only. Other in-person options include paying 
with a money order, cashier’s check or personal check made payable to 
DOR.
Note. All payments to DOR must be made with U.S. Funds. 
Payment plan option. If you cannot pay the full amount due at the 
time you file, you may be eligible to set up a payment plan online 
using DOR’s e-services portal, the Indiana Taxpayer Information 
Management Engine (INTIME), at intime.dor.in.gov. INTIME offers 
customers the ability to manage their tax account(s) in one convenient 
location, 24/7. Create an INTIME logon to manage your account, 
make payments, establish payment plans, and more. After your return 
finishes processing, a payment plan can be established.
Important. If using the payment plan option, penalty and interest will 
be due on all amounts paid after the April 15, 2025, due date.
If you have questions, contact DOR in one of three ways:
	•
Use the secure messaging feature in the Indiana Taxpayer 
Information Management Engine (INTIME). If you are not 
registered, create an online account at intime.dor.in.gov. Select 
“New to INTIME? Sign up” and follow instructions to complete 
the process. You will need your taxpayer ID (FEIN, SSN, etc.) and 
the unique Letter ID, printed in the upper-right hand corner of 
this letter. Once logged in, select “Respond to a letter, notice, or 
bill” under the “All Actions” menu.
	•
Call DOR Customer Service at 317-232-2240, Monday through 
Friday, 8 a.m. - 4:30 p.m. EST.
	•
Correspond with DOR via mail using this address:  
Indiana Department of Revenue 
100 N. Senate Ave. 
Indianapolis, IN 46204-2253
Returned Checks and Other Types of Payments
If you make a tax payment with a check, credit card, debit card, 
electronic funds transfer, or any other instrument in payment by any 
commercially allowable means, and DOR is unable to obtain payment 
for its full amount when it is presented for payment through normal 
banking channels, a $35 penalty will be assessed. 
The assessed amount will be due immediately upon receipt of the tax 
due notice and must be paid by certified check, bank draft or money 
order. Note. Any permits and/or licenses issued by DOR may be revoked 
if the assessed amount is not paid immediately.
Signatures and Signing Dates
First, read the Authorization area on Schedule 7. Then, sign and date 
the tax return. If this is a jointly filed tax return, both you and your 
spouse must sign and date it. Make sure to enclose the completed 
Schedule 7 when filing.
Taxpayer Advocate 
As prescribed by the Taxpayer Bill of Rights, DOR has an appointed 
Taxpayer Advocate whose purpose is to facilitate the resolution of 
taxpayer complaints and complex tax issues. If you have a complex tax 
issue, you must first pursue resolution through normal channels, such 
as contacting the customer service division at 317-232-2240. If you 
are still unable to resolve your tax issue, or a tax assessment places an 
undue hardship on you, you may receive assistance from the Office of 
the Taxpayer Advocate.
For more information, and to get required schedules if filing for an 
offer in compromise or a hardship case, visit our website at:  
www.in.gov/dor/about/contact-us/taxpayer-help. You may also contact 
the Office of the Taxpayer Advocate directly at taxadvocate@dor.in.gov, 
or by telephone at 317-232-4692. Submit supporting information and 
documents to: Indiana Department of Revenue, Office of the Taxpayer 
Advocate, P.O. Box 6155, Indianapolis, IN 46206-6155.
Where to Mail Your Tax Return 
If you are enclosing a payment, please mail your tax return with all 
enclosures to:
Indiana Department of Revenue 
P.O. Box 7224 
Indianapolis, IN 46207-7224
For all other filings, please mail your tax return with all enclosures to:
Indiana Department of Revenue 
P.O. Box 40 
Indianapolis, IN 46206-0040
Schedule 1: Add-Backs
Some amounts reported on your federal tax return may require 
different treatment for Indiana income tax purposes. Listed in this 
area are those items that may need to be added back on your Indiana 
tax return. Please review the list carefully. When reporting these add-
backs, maintain with your records the corresponding federal tax forms 
and schedules as DOR can require you to provide them at a later date.
Important Information About Possible Year-End 
Federal Legislation
This publication was finalized before all year-end federal legislative 
changes were complete. Therefore, some of these add-backs may need 
to be adjusted. You may wish to periodically check DOR’s homepage 
at www.in.gov/dor for updates about any impact of late federal 
legislation.
Treatment of Previously Discontinued Add-Back
Several discontinued add-backs were created as a result of timing 
differences between federal and Indiana allowable expenses. See Certain 
Discontinued Add-Backs: How and When to Report a Final Catch-Up 
Modification on page 15 for information about these add-backs.
Line 1 – Tax Add-Back
If you did not complete Federal Schedules C, E or F, which include 
sole proprietorship income, farm income, rental, partnership, S 
corporation, and trust and estate income (or loss), then do not 
complete this line.
Schedule 1: Add-Backs


--- Page 13 ---

IT-40 Booklet 2024
Page 13
On those schedules you are allowed to claim a deduction for taxes paid 
which are:
	•
Based on, or
	•
Measured by income, and
	•
Levied at a state level by any state in the United States. 
If you claimed this kind of deduction on any of these schedules, 
then you must add it back to your Indiana income. Do not add back 
property taxes on this line.
State-level pass through entity taxes that are deducted in determining 
your federal adjusted gross income should be added back on this line. 
If you subsequently receive a refund of those taxes, report the refund 
on this line as a deduction.
Wagering Taxes. The portion of wagering taxes required to be added 
back as a tax based on or measured by income is being reduced (phased 
out). The percentage of taxes required to be added back is determined 
by the first date of the taxpayer’s taxable year, and is determined as 
follows: 2020 – 75%; 2021 – 62.5%; 2022 – 50%; 2023 – 37.5% 2024 – 
25.0%; 2025 – 12.5%; 2026 and later – no add back required.
For example, Casino X deducts $10,000,000 in wagering taxes in 2024. 
Individual owns 10% of Casino X. Individual’s share of Casino X’s 
income taxes is $1,000,000. Instead of individual adding back the full 
$1,000,000, Individual will add back $250,000.
Note. Income, losses and/or expenses from other schedules and 
forms may flow through to federal Schedules C, E and F. For example, 
partnership income from federal Schedule K-1 (Form 1065) may be 
included on federal Schedule E, while expenses from federal Form 
8829 may be included on federal Schedule C. Make sure to check these 
schedules and forms for any deduction that needs to be added back.
Line 2 – Net Operating Loss Add-Back
Any net operating loss (NOL) deduction reported on line 8 of your 
federal Schedule 1 must be added back on this line. Write the amount of 
the net operating loss as a positive figure. (You may be eligible to claim 
an Indiana net operating loss deduction on Schedule 2, under line 9.)
Note. Leave this line blank if you did not report a net operating loss 
deduction on line 8a of your federal Schedule 1.
Line 3 – OOS Municipal Obligation Interest Add-Back
Interest earned from a direct obligation of a state or political 
subdivision other than Indiana (out of state, or OOS) is taxable by 
Indiana if the obligation is acquired after Dec. 31, 2011. Interest earned 
from obligations held or acquired before Jan. 1, 2012, is not subject to 
Indiana income tax and should not be reported as an add-back.
Note. Interest earned from obligations of Puerto Rico, Guam, Virgin 
Islands, American Samoa, or Northern Mariana is not included in 
federal gross income and is exempt under federal law. There is no add-
back for interest earned on these obligations.
For more information about this add-back, see Income Tax 
Information Bulletin #19 at www.in.gov/dor/files/ib19.pdf.
Line 4 – Bonus Depreciation Add-Back 
You must make an modification for any bonus depreciation deduction 
used for property placed in service after Sept. 11, 2001. Bonus 
depreciation is the additional first-year special depreciation deduction 
allowed under Section 168(k) of the Internal Revenue Code (IRC). 
Figure the net income (or loss) that would have been included in 
federal adjusted gross income had the bonus depreciation method 
not been used. Then, enter the difference, which may be a positive or 
negative amount, on line 4.
Example. Mack used the bonus depreciation method for federal 
income tax purposes. After refiguring the depreciation without using 
the bonus method, he has to add back $1,500 on his Indiana tax 
return. 
Note. After making an initial adjustment for bonus depreciation you 
will need to refigure the amount of depreciation available for state tax 
purposes for subsequent years. 
Example. Ann made an initial adjustment for bonus depreciation on 
last year’s Indiana tax return. This year she figures she is entitled to 
a $150 additional depreciation amount for state tax purposes. She 
should enter that amount as a negative entry, or -150, on line 4.
Special rules may apply if the bonus depreciation is taken against 
property acquired in a like-kind exchange or acquired in a taxable 
year in which you have an excess business loss. See Income Tax 
Information Bulletin #118 at www.in.gov/dor/files/ib118.pdf for 
additional information.
Line 5 – Section 179 Expense Add-Back
You may have figured an IRC Section 179 expense using a ceiling 
of more than $25,000 for federal tax purposes. Indiana allows you 
to figure IRC Section 179 expense using a ceiling of no more than 
$25,000. If you figured IRC Section 179 expense using a ceiling 
amount of more than $25,000, you will need to add back the difference 
between it and $25,000 on line 5.
Special rules may apply if the bonus depreciation is taken against 
property acquired in a like-kind exchange or acquired in a taxable 
year in which you have an excess business loss. See Income Tax 
Information Bulletin #118 at www.in.gov/dor/files/ib118.pdf for 
additional information.
Line 6 – Other Add-Backs
Each of the following add-backs has been assigned a 3-digit code 
number. When reporting the add-back, write its name, the associated 
3-digit number and the amount.
Conformity Add-Back
Before this publication was finalized Indiana had not conformed 
to any changes to the Internal Revenue Code (IRC) that may have 
become law after Jan. 1, 2024. Therefore, the IRC used to figure 
Indiana income may not wind up being the same as the IRC used to 
figure federal income. 
Schedule 1: Add-Backs Continued


--- Page 14 ---

IT-40 Booklet 2024
Page 14
This add-back is specific to these annual current year conformity 
issues. If uncertainty exists as to whether or not Indiana will adopt 
some or all of the federal legislation passed after Jan. 1, 2024, that acts 
to modify federal AGI, you may add-back those items as an “other” 
add-back. In the event those items are adopted, an amended return 
should be filed to recoup the add-back(s). 
Conformity Add-Back – Positive Entry  120
This add-back is only for: 
	•
Current year conformity issues, and
	•
Add-backs required by Indiana legislation passed retroactively to 
years before 2024.
Conformity issues for preceding tax years must be addressed on the 
add-back line specific to the item in question.
If the state legislature does not conform to federal code changes enacted 
after Jan. 1, 2024, you may have to amend your return at a later date to 
reflect any differences between Indiana and federal law. You may wish to 
periodically check DOR’s homepage at www.in.gov/dor for updates.
Enter code 120 on Schedule 1 under line 6 if reporting this add-back.
Conformity Add-Back – Negative Entry  147
This add-back generally is based on conformity issues arising from a 
previous year or on deductions enacted by Indiana legislation passed 
retroactively to years before 2024. However, in rare cases this can arise 
from conformity issues arising in the current year where the IRC treats 
an item as taxable or nondeductible that was previously exempt or 
deductible. 
Enter code 147 on Schedule 1 under line 6 if reporting this add-back.
Discharge of Debt Reduction of Net Operating 
Losses  155
If you have a net operating loss carryforward that is required to 
be reduced as a result of discharges of debt excluded from federal 
gross income and reported on Schedule NOL-MOD, list an amount 
necessary to use up any NOL carryforwards. 
To determine this amount, first complete the return as normal. Then, 
determine how much net operating loss carryforwards are required to 
be used as a result of debt discharge. The amount to be reported is the 
amount necessary to make Schedule 2, line 9 equal to the sum of any 
Indiana net operating losses allowed for the current year plus any Indiana 
net operating losses required to be reduced due to debt discharges. Please 
complete Schedule NOL-MOD before entering an amount for Code 155.
Employer Student Loan Payment Add-Back  148
If your employer paid any amount for your student loans and you 
excluded the payment from your federal gross income, add back the 
amount you excluded from your gross income. This amount must be 
added back regardless of whether your employer paid you the amount 
for your student loans or whether your employer paid the student loan 
on your behalf. Also see the instructions for the deduction for the 
Employer Student Loan Payment Interest Deduction on page 20.
Excess Federal Interest Deduction Modification  142
IRC Section 163(j) limits the federal interest deduction for most 
business interest to 30% (50% for 2019 and 2020 in certain cases) 
of adjusted taxable income plus business interest. However, Indiana 
has decoupled from this provision. Subtract an amount equal to the 
amount as a deduction for excess business interest under IRC Section 
163(j) in the year in which the interest was first paid or accrued. If you 
are deducting any business interest carried over from a previous year, 
add the amount of this interest deducted. Enter code 142 on Schedule 
1 under line 6 if reporting this add-back.
Federal Repatriated Dividend Deduction Add-Back  139 
Untaxed foreign earnings and profits are repatriated dividends that 
need to be reported when filing state taxes. Individuals should add 
back the deduction taken on federal Form 965, Line 17. For additional 
information see Income Tax Information Bulletin #116 at  
www.in.gov/dor/files/ib116.pdf.
Modifications for Excess Business Losses  151
If you:
	•
Have a current-year excess business loss under IRC section 461(l) 
that is not deducted in determining your federal adjusted gross 
income, 
	•
Have current-year federal deductions that:
	ο
are disallowed in determining your current-year federal 
adjusted gross income, and
	ο
for which an add-back is required for Indiana adjusted gross 
income tax purposes,
use Code 151 to deduct the add-backs required for Indiana purposes. 
The most common examples will be bonus depreciation, IRC section 
179 expensing, and the add-back for state and local taxes deducted 
in determining federal adjusted gross income. Do not report 
modifications arising from prior year Indiana modifications such as 
bonus depreciation catch-up modifications.
First, if you have such add-backs, report the add-backs in the normal 
manner as if no excess business loss limitation was in effect under IRC 
section 461(l). Second, report the lesser of these add-backs required 
for Indiana purposes or the IRC section 461(l) disallowance (Form 
1040, Schedule 1, Line 8p) as a Code 151 deduction. Also report this 
amount on Schedule NOL-MOD, Part 2.
The Code 151 deduction will reduce the net operating loss 
carryforward allowable for Indiana purposes.
Example. Bob has $100,000 of federal adjusted gross income, 
consisting of $370,000 salary and a $270,000 allowable loss from 
Partnership A. Bob has a $300,000 excess business loss disallowed 
from Partnership A. Bob’s share of Partnership A’s income included 
$470,000 in losses other than bonus depreciation and $100,000 of 
bonus depreciation, of which only $270,000 of cumulative losses 
are allowed in the current year. Bob otherwise has an $80,000 
bonus depreciation add-back for Indiana purposes. Bob will report 
the $80,000 add-back for bonus depreciation and also report an 
$80,000 deduction using Code 151. This will also result reduce the 
net operating loss for the current year to $220,000 ($300,000 excess 
business loss minus $80,000).
Schedule 1: Add-Backs Continued


--- Page 15 ---

IT-40 Booklet 2024
Page 15
Example. Bob has $100,000 of federal adjusted gross income, consisting 
of $370,000 salary and a $270,000 allowable loss from Partnership A. 
Bob has a $300,000 excess business loss disallowed from Partnership A. 
Bob’s share of Partnership A’s income included $170,000 in losses other 
than bonus depreciation and $400,000 of bonus depreciation, of which 
only $270,000 of cumulative losses are allowed in the current year. Bob 
otherwise has a $320,000 bonus depreciation add-back for Indiana 
purposes. Bob will report the $320,000 add-back for bonus depreciation. 
However, because the excess business loss is less than the Indiana add-
back, the Code 151 deduction is limited to the $300,000 excess business 
loss. The net operating loss for the current year will be zero.
Modifications from Excess Inclusion Income  153
If you:
	•
Have a net operating loss for federal purposes incurred in the 
current taxable year that does not appear in your federal taxable 
income as a result of reporting excess inclusion income under 
IRC section 860E; and
	•
Have modifications to your Indiana adjusted gross income that 
are allowable in determining your Indiana net operating loss;
use Code 153 to report the amount of modifications that are allowable 
in determining the portion of your net operating loss not already 
part of your adjusted gross income. In most cases this will equal 
your excess inclusion income. Report the net modifications using the 
inverse of the signage for the underlying modifications. Also complete 
Schedule NOL-MOD, Part 2, to report this amount.
Example. Individual A has a $100 of excess inclusion income. 
Individual A also has a $20,000 Indiana bonus depreciation add-back 
and a $50,000 net operating loss for federal purposes. The portion of 
net operating loss not directly reported for federal purposes is $100 
(the excess inclusion income). Individual A will report the $20,000 
add-back as bonus depreciation and a negative $100 using Code 153. 
The Code 153 in conjunction with other modifications will result in a 
$30,000 Indiana net operating loss.
Do not report a Code 153 modification if:
	•
The amount determined is positive (i.e., net deductions exceed net 
add-backs), or
	•
You do not have a federal net operating loss.
Qualified Preferred Stock  113 
If an individual:
	•
Had losses from the sale or exchange of preferred stock in either 
Federal National Mortgage Association or Federal Home Loan 
Mortgage Corporation; 
	•
Treated the loss from the sale or exchange as ordinary income 
for federal income tax purposes in the year the loss had been 
incurred; and
	•
Had any amount previously added back that not been allowed as 
a deduction,
the individual is permitted to continue deducting the loss not 
previously allowed as a capital loss. However, the amount allowable as 
a capital loss must be computed in accordance with federal limitations 
on allowable capital losses. See IRC sections 1211 and 1212 for further 
details on federal limitations. Enter code 113 on Schedule 1 under line 
6 if reporting this add-back.
Specified Research and Experimental  
Expenses Add-Back  154
If you claimed a federal income tax deduction for specified research 
and experimental expenses that are required to be amortized for 
federal purposes pursuant to IRC section 174, add back the amount of 
expenses you actually deducted for federal income tax purposes. See 
the instructions for Code 641 for further information on the amount 
of expenses allowable as a deduction.
Note. If after printing of these instructions, IRC Section 174 is 
amended to allow immediate expensing of research and experimental 
expenses and you elect to amortize those expenses, you cannot use this 
code and Code 641 to accelerate the allowance of your expenses.
Example. Individual A incurred $100,000 of specified research 
expenses in 2024. Individual A reported $10,000 of amortized 
expenses in 2024. Individual A will use Code 154 to add back the 
$10,000 claimed for federal purposes and use Code 641 to report 
$100,000 allowable for Indiana purposes. For 2025-2029, Individual A 
will continue to use Code 154 to report timing differences.
Student Loan Discharge Add-Back  150
If you had a student loan discharged during the taxable year and you 
excluded the amount of the discharge from your federal gross income, 
add back the amount of discharged loans excluded from your federal 
gross income. Do not add back amounts discharged or repaid via:
	•
The Public Service Loan Forgiveness Program.
	•
The Teacher Loan Forgiveness Program.
	•
The National Health Service Corps Loan Repayment Program.
	•
Other programs that qualify under IRC section 108(f)(4).
	•
A discharge granted to a borrower under the Closed School or 
Defense to Repayment discharge processes if the IRS permits the 
discharge to be excluded from gross income.
	•
The death or total and permanent disability of the student.
	•
The discharge of the student loan in bankruptcy.
	•
If the student loan was discharged while the borrower was 
insolvent. However, the discharge is limited to the amount the 
borrower was insolvent. Further, if a loan is discharged under 
the other bullets, those discharges must be applied before the 
insolvency exception.
Note. The amounts added back may include portions of student loans 
forgiven during 2024. This add-back applies to student loans forgiven 
under income-based repayment plan corrections. These loans are 
subject to the insolvency exception above. The exceptions listed above 
also apply to 2024 loan forgiveness even if the loan may not have been 
forgiven otherwise.
Certain Discontinued Add-Backs: How and When to 
Report a Final Catch-Up Modification
Required add-backs for the following modifications have been 
eliminated, effective Jan. 1, 2013:
	•
Motorsports Entertainment Complex, Code 130
	•
Qualified Advance Mining Safety Equipment, Code 126
	•
Qualified Electric Utility Amortization, Code 135
	•
Qualified Environmental Remediation Costs, Code 121
	•
Qualified Leasehold Improvement Property, Code 129
	•
Qualified Restaurant Improvement Property, Code 108
Schedule 1: Add-Backs Continued


--- Page 16 ---

IT-40 Booklet 2024
Page 16
	•
Qualified Retail Improvement Property, Code 109
	•
Start-Up Expenditures, Code 131
Required add-backs for the following modifications have been 
eliminated, effective Jan. 1, 2016:
	•
Qualified Disaster Assistance Property, Code 110
	•
Qualified Refinery Property, Code 111
	•
Qualified Film or Television Production, Code 112
If you previously reported any of these add-backs, see the following 
example for guidance as to how to figure and report a final catch-up 
modification.
Example. Grant has qualified restaurant equipment. For federal tax 
purposes he used the accelerated 15-year recovery period for an asset 
placed in service since 2009. Since 2009 Grant had been adding back 
the depreciation expense taken for federal purposes that exceeded the 
amount allowable for Indiana purposes. The accumulated depreciation 
on such an asset through 2012 was, therefore, different for federal 
and state purposes. This difference will remain until the asset is fully 
depreciated or until the time of its disposition. 
A simple illustration:
Asset – acquired January, 2009 – qualified restaurant property – 
purchase price $120,000. This normally would have had a 39-year 
recovery period; IRC Sec. 168 allows for a 15-year recovery period.
Asset acquired Jan. 2009 
$120,000 purchase price
Federal 
Depreciation
Add- 
Back
Indiana 
Depreciation
Year 1 (2009)
8,000
4,924
3,076
Year 2 (2010)
8,000
4,924
3,076
Year 3 (2011)
8,000
4,924
3,076
Year 4 (2012)
8,000
4,924
3,076
Year 5 (2013) 
Accumulated Depreciation
8,000
40,000
0
8,000
20,304
Year 6 – 15 
Accumulated Depreciation
80,000
120,000
0
80,000
100,304
Year 16 – 38 
Accumulated Depreciation
0
0
0
Year 39 (or year of 
disposition) Add-back
0 -19,696
19,696
Tax year 2012 is the last year Grant reported an add-back until the 
end of the recovery period. Had this asset been sold before being 
fully depreciated, the catch-up modification would be reflected in the 
year of the sale. If this property is held through 2048 (the 39th year of 
depreciation), Grant will report a negative $19,696 catch-up add-back 
on his 2048 state tax return.
Enter the associated 3-digit code on Schedule 1 under line 6 if 
reporting a final catch-up modification.
Reporting Certain Prior-Year Modifications
In certain cases, a modification in a prior year may have been limited 
due to various federal limitations, including basis limitations, passive 
loss limitations, and at-risk loss limitations.
Even though certain modifications may not apply to activities during 
the current taxable year, you may be required to report a modification 
when you have income against which to realize the modification. Use 
the modification code for the year in which the modification was 
actually accrued.  
Schedule 2: Deductions
Line 1 – Renter’s Deduction
You may be able to take the renter’s deduction if:
	•
You paid rent on your principal place of residence, and
	•
You rented a place that was subject to Indiana property tax.
Your “principal place of residence” is the place where you have your 
true, fixed, permanent home and where you intend to return after 
being absent.
If you rented a manufactured home or paid rent for your 
manufactured home lot, you may claim the renter’s deduction if the 
above requirements are met. Rent paid for summer homes or vacation 
homes is not deductible.
You cannot claim the renter’s deduction if the rental property was not 
subject to Indiana property tax. Examples of this type of property are:
	•
Government owned housing,
	•
Property owned by a nonprofit organization,
	•
Student housing,
	•
Property owned by a cooperative association, and
	•
Property located outside of Indiana.
How do I report my deduction? First, complete the information area 
by entering:
	•
The address where rented if it’s different from the address on the 
front of the return (leave blank if it is not different),
	•
The landlord’s name and address,
	•
The total amount of rent paid, and
	•
The number of months you lived there.
If you moved during the year or had more than one landlord, you 
must list the same information for each place that you rented. Enclose 
additional pages if necessary.
How much rent can I deduct? You can deduct up to $3,000 ($1,500 if 
married filing separately) or the amount of rent paid, whichever is less.
Example. Emily paid $4,800 in rent on her principal place of residence. 
She will claim a $3,000 renter’s deduction. 
Example. Bill paid $400 rent for his first apartment. He moved to 
another location during the year and paid $2,800 rent for the rest of 
the year. His deduction will be limited to $3,000, even though he paid 
$3,200 altogether.
Schedule 2: Deductions


--- Page 17 ---

IT-40 Booklet 2024
Page 17
Important. Keep copies of your rental receipts, landlord identifying 
information and lease agreements as DOR can require you to provide 
this information.
For more information about this deduction, see Income Tax 
Information Bulletin #38 at www.in.gov/dor/files/ib38.pdf.
Line 2 – Homeowner’s Residential Property Tax 
Deduction
You may be able to take a deduction of up to $2,500 ($1,250 if married 
filing separately) of the Indiana property taxes (residential real estate 
taxes) paid on your principal place of residence. Your “principal place 
of residence” is the place where you have your true, fixed home and 
where you intend to return after being absent.
Note. Property tax paid for summer homes or vacation homes is not 
deductible.
Important. You cannot claim this deduction for property tax paid in 
2024 if you are claiming the Lake County residential income tax credit 
on Schedule 5, line 7.
How do I claim my deduction? Complete the information area on 
Schedule 2, line 2. Enter the address of your principal residence where 
the Indiana property tax was paid if it is different from the address on 
the front of the return. If you had more than one principal residence 
during the year, and you paid Indiana property tax on both residences, 
list the additional residence on a separate piece of paper. 
Example. Jamie and Ella each owned their own home; they married 
in 2024. They sold both of their homes during the year and began 
renting. They are eligible to claim a property tax deduction on the 
combined property taxes paid on both homes if they are filing a joint 
return (limited to $2,500 altogether).
	•
Enter the number of months you lived there. If you claim more 
than one residence, enter the number of months lived at the other 
residence(s) on a separate sheet of paper.
	•
Enter the amount of Indiana property tax paid. If you lived in 
more than one residence during the year, enter the combined 
amount of Indiana property tax paid on all principal residences.
	•
Enter the smaller of $2,500 ($1,250 if married filing separately) or 
the amount of Indiana property tax paid.
No double benefit allowed. If any portion of property taxes paid 
on your principal residence was deducted as an expense on federal 
Schedule C, E or F, then do not deduct that amount on this line.
Example. Jean paid $1,200 in Indiana property tax on her home. She 
used one room of her home for her business, and deducted $200 
Indiana property tax as an expense on her federal Schedule C. Jean 
is allowed a deduction of $1,000 ($1,200 minus the $200 deduction 
already taken on federal Schedule C).
How do I find out how much I paid in Indiana property tax 
on my principal residence? Indiana counties send statements to 
homeowners showing how much property tax is due on their property. 
Add together the 2024 spring and fall installments, if you paid both of 
them. If you received just one installment statement this year for your 
2024 property taxes, use the amount paid for that installment.
Sometimes mortgage companies pay the Indiana property tax from an 
escrow account. If your mortgage company pays it, they should send 
you a Form 1098 (or its equivalent) showing the amount of property 
tax paid. If you cannot locate the information, contact your local 
county treasurer’s office or your mortgage company.
Important. You must maintain copies of proof that you paid 
your Indiana property tax as DOR can require you to provide this 
information. This could include the Form 1098, the property tax 
statement from your local assessor’s office, cancelled checks, etc.
Line 3 – State Tax Refund Reported on Federal Return
If you entered a state tax refund amount on federal Schedule 1, line 1, 
then enter that amount here.
Line 4 – Interest on U.S. Government Obligations 
Deduction
If the amount on line 1 of Form IT-40 includes interest income, you 
may be able to take a deduction. If any part of your interest income 
included on line 1 is from a direct obligation of the U.S. government, 
you can deduct this amount.
Examples of U.S. government obligations include U.S. savings bonds, 
U.S. Treasury bills and U.S. government certificates. This interest is 
usually reported on federal Schedule B.
Interest income reported from a trust, estate, partnership or S 
corporation that is from U.S. government obligations should also be 
deducted on this line.
Note. When certain U.S. savings bonds are redeemed to pay expenses 
for higher education, the interest may be excluded from federal 
adjusted gross income. Therefore, do not enter any interest from 
U.S. savings bonds that is shown on your federal Schedule B, line 3 
(because it has already been excluded from income).
For more information about this deduction see Income Tax 
Information Bulletin #19 at www.in.gov/dor/files/ib19.pdf.
Lines 5 and 6 – Taxable Social Security and/or 
Railroad Retirement Benefits Deduction
Indiana does not tax Social Security income or the railroad retirement 
benefits that are issued by the U.S. Railroad Retirement Board. 
To figure your deduction:
	•
Enter the amount from federal Form 1040/1040-SR, line 6b, on 
Indiana’s Schedule 2, line 5.
	•
If you have included railroad retirement benefits that are issued 
by the U.S. Railroad Retirement Board on line 5b of your federal 
Form 1040/1040-SR, then enter that amount on Indiana’s 
Schedule 2, line 6.
Important. Do not enter any other types of pension or retirement 
income on these lines.
Schedule 2: Deductions Continued


--- Page 18 ---

IT-40 Booklet 2024
Page 18
Note. See the Railroad Unemployment and Sickness Benefits deduction 
instructions on page 23 if you have received unemployment and/or 
sickness benefits from the Railroad Retirement Board.
A Word About the Three Military Income Deductions
Military income recipients may be eligible to claim one or more of the 
three deductions based on the type of income/benefits they get.
1.	
Military Service Deduction (including the National Guard 
and reserve component of the armed forces) 
Individuals with military pay from active duty in the armed forces 
may be eligible to deduct that income. See the Military Service 
Deduction below to find out if you qualify for this deduction. 
2.	
Military Retirement Income and/or Survivor’s Benefits 
Deduction 
Individuals with military retirement income and/or survivor’s 
benefits may be eligible to deduct those benefits. See the 
Military Retirement Income and/or Survivor’s Benefits Deduction 
information on page 22 to see if you qualify. 
3.	
National Guard and Reserve Component Members 
Deduction 
This deduction is available for qualified military income received 
as a member of the Indiana National Guard or an armed 
forces reserve component. See the National Guard and Reserve 
Component Members Deduction on 
 to see if you qualify 
for this deduction.
Line 7 – Military Service Deduction (active duty armed 
forces members only)
Note. National Guard and armed forces reserves members will not 
report the deduction for their income on this line. Please see the 
instructions for Line 11, National Guard and Reserve Component 
Members Deduction on page 22.
Important. The military service deduction and the military retirement 
income and/or survivor’s benefits deduction are reported in two 
different places.
	•
You (and/or your spouse, if married filing jointly and both 
qualify) will report your active military service income deduction 
here. 
	•
You (and/or your spouse, if married filing jointly and both 
qualify) will report your military retirement income and/or 
survivor’s benefits deduction on Schedule 2 under line 11, Other 
Deductions. See the instructions for Military Retirement Income 
and Survivor’s Benefits Deduction on page 22.
The income on line 1 of Form IT-40 may include military pay from 
active duty in the armed forces (reserve). If it does, you may be eligible 
to take this deduction.
Beginning in 2024, this deduction is for the full amount of military 
pay included in your federal adjusted gross income.
Example 1. Louis earned $25,000 from active service in the Army. 
Brooklynn, his wife, earned $2,640 from the Indiana National Guard. 
Louis is eligible for a $25,000 deduction; Brooklynn is not eligible to 
claim the deduction on this line. However, Brooklynn can claim a 
$2,640 deduction using Code 621 on Line 11. 
Military income earned while in a combat zone is not taxable on your 
federal or state income tax returns. Since Indiana is not taxing this 
income, your combat zone income is not eligible for a deduction.
Example 2. Jim was on active duty the first month of the year. He was 
stationed in a combat zone the rest of the year. His military W-2 form 
shows the first month’s regular military wage income of $1,250 in Box 
1. Only $1,250 of his income is taxed on his federal (and Indiana) tax 
returns. Jim should claim a $1,250 military deduction. 
Important. You must enclose your military W-2 form(s) if you are 
claiming this deduction.
For more information about this deduction see Income Tax 
Information Bulletin #27 at www.in.gov/dor/files/ib27.pdf.
Line 8 – Private School/Homeschool Deduction
You may be eligible for a deduction based on education expenditures 
paid for each dependent child who is enrolled in a private school or is 
homeschooled.
Dependent Child Qualifications
	•
Your dependent child must be eligible to receive a free elementary 
or high school education (K-12 range) in an Indiana school 
corporation;
	•
You must be eligible to claim the child as a dependent on your 
federal tax return; and
	•
The child must be your natural or adopted child or, if not, 
you must have been awarded custody of the child in a court 
proceeding making you the court appointed guardian or 
custodian of the child.
Education expenditure. This refers to any expenditures made in 
connection with enrollment, attendance, or participation of your 
dependent child in a private elementary or high school education 
program. The term includes tuition, fees, computer software, 
textbooks, workbooks, curricula, school supplies (other than personal 
computers), and other written materials used primarily for academic 
instruction or for academic tutoring, or both. The term does not 
include the delivery of instructional service in a home setting to your 
dependent child who is enrolled in a school corporation or a charter 
school. This term also does not include educational expenditures that 
are reimbursed, such as by a scholarship or grant.
A “private elementary or high school education program” means 
attendance at a nonpublic school (including a private school, a 
parochial school and a homeschool) in Indiana that satisfies a child’s 
obligation for compulsory attendance at a school.
The obligation for “compulsory attendance” means a child must be in 
attendance in a school (public and/or private) for a minimum of 180 
days in a calendar year. 
Note. No deduction will be available based on a child who is enrolled 
in school for a period of less than 180 days in a calendar year.
Schedule 2: Deductions Continued


--- Page 19 ---

IT-40 Booklet 2024
Page 19
Figure your deduction. If you made an unreimbursed education 
expenditure during the year your deduction is: 
	•
$1,000; multiplied by
	•
The number of qualified dependent children for whom you made 
education expenditures.
Example. Greg and Constance have three children ages 7, 9 and 11. The 
two oldest children attend a private school. The youngest child attends 
the neighborhood public school. The parents purchased schoolbooks 
for all three children. They will be eligible for a $2,000 deduction (the 
youngest does not qualify as he attends a public school).
Note. A qualifying child may be claimed for this deduction only 
once per year. For example, if a husband and wife are married and 
filing separately, whichever parent is eligible to claim the child as a 
dependent for exemption purposes is eligible to claim this deduction.
For more information about this deduction, see Income Tax 
Information Bulletin #107 at www.in.gov/dor/files/ib107.pdf.
Line 9 – Indiana Net Operating Loss Deduction
You may take a deduction for any Indiana net operating losses 
allowable. (This will be a net operating loss deduction from an earlier 
year(s) carried forward to 2024). 
Complete Schedule IT-40NOL to determine the amount available to 
be deducted this year. Make sure to enter the amount you are eligible 
to deduct as a positive figure.
Note. It is possible to have an Indiana NOL without also having a federal 
NOL. See the instructions for IT-40NOL beginning on page 48. For 
years prior to 2024, the modifications required to compute an Indiana 
NOL may have changed after publication of the IT-40NOL for the prior 
year. See the instructions for a list of modifications required for each 
year and, if necessary, revise the IT-40NOL for changes in modifications.
In most cases, you will need to complete federal Form 1045 in order 
to determine your federal net operating loss. You may be asked 
to provide a copy of federal Form 1045 or such other calculations 
necessary to determine your federal and Indiana net operating loss.
Enclose a completed Indiana Schedule IT-40NOL when claiming this 
deduction. If your IRS Form 172, Part 1, or the equivalent worksheet 
from IRS Publication 536, included itemized deductions to increase the 
federal net operating loss, enclose a pro forma copy of the IRS Form 
172, Part 1, or the equivalent worksheet from IRS Publication 536, 
computing the net operating loss without the itemized deductions.
Also, maintain with your records a copy of the federal Form 
1040/1040-SR from the loss year as DOR can require you to provide 
this information at a later date.
Line 10 – Nontaxable Portion of Unemployment 
Compensation
You may be eligible for a deduction if you reported unemployment 
compensation on your federal income tax return. Complete the 
worksheet below to see if you are eligible. Make sure to enclose your 
1099G(s) if you claim the deduction. 
Important. Do not include any unemployment compensation issued 
by the U.S. Railroad Retirement Board on line 1 of the worksheet. 
Instead, see the instructions for the Railroad Unemployment and 
Sickness Benefits Deduction on page 23 for more information.
Line 11 – Other Deductions
Each of the following deductions has been assigned a 3-digit code 
number. When claiming the deduction on Schedule 2 under line 11, 
write the name of the deduction, the three-digit code number and the 
amount claimed.
Career Scholarship Account Deduction  642
If you received a distribution from a career scholarship account and 
that distribution is included in your federal adjusted gross income, you 
are entitled to a deduction for the portion of the distribution included 
in your federal adjusted gross income.
Note. Do not claim this deduction if the distribution was not included 
in your federal adjusted gross income.
Schedule 2: Deductions Continued
Unemployment Compensation Worksheet
Note: If you were married but filing separately, and you lived with your spouse at any time during the year, enter -0- on line 3 of the worksheet. 
	
However, if you were married but filing separately, and lived apart from your spouse the entire year, enter $12,000 on line 3.
1.	
Unemployment compensation included on IT-40, line 1 (do not include any unemployment  
compensation issued by the Railroad Retirement Board - see instructions)................................................
1
2.	
Federal adjusted gross income from federal Form 1040, line 11.................................................................
2
3.	
Enter $12,000 if single, or $18,000 if married filing a joint return.................................................................
3
4.	
Subtract line 3 from line 2. If zero or less, enter -0-.....................................................................................
4
5.	
Enter one-half of the amount on line 4 (divide line 4 by the number 2)........................................................
5
6.	
Taxable unemployment compensation for Indiana purposes: enter the amount from either line 1 
or line 5, whichever is smaller......................................................................................................................
6
7.	
Subtract line 6 from line 1. Carry this amount to Schedule 2, line 10..........................................................
7


--- Page 20 ---

IT-40 Booklet 2024
Page 20
Civil Service Annuity Deduction  601
The income on line 1 of Form IT-40 may include federal civil service 
annuity income. If it does, you may be eligible to take a deduction if 
you were at least 62 years of age by the end of the tax year and/or a 
surviving spouse of a civil service annuitant.
For each civil service annuitant, the deduction is limited to:
	•
The lesser of the amount of taxable civil service annuity income 
included in federal adjusted gross income or $16,000, 
	•
Less all amounts of Social Security income and tier 1 and tier 2 
Railroad Retirement income (issued by the Railroad Retirement 
Board) received by the civil service annuitant.
Example. The taxable amount of your civil service annuity is $6,000. 
You received $1,200 in Social Security income. You are age 67.
Here is how to figure your deduction.
Lesser of the taxable amount of the annuity or $16,000...............  $6,000
Total of Social Security/tier 1 & tier 2 Railroad  
Retirement income...........................................................................- $1,200
Allowable deduction ........................................................................  $4,800
If you receive a civil service annuity both for yourself and as a 
surviving spouse, the combined deduction cannot exceed $16,000.
Example. Matthew and Claire, both age 68, file a joint federal and state 
income tax return. They each receive a civil service annuity and Social 
Security income. 
Matthew’s taxable civil service annuity is $13,700; he also received 
$17,500 in Social Security income. Since the Social Security income 
he received is greater than the taxable amount of his annuity, he is not 
eligible for a deduction.
Claire’s taxable civil service annuity is $21,900; she also received 
$6,300 in Social Security income. 
Here is how to figure Claire’s deduction.
Lesser of the taxable amount of the annuity or $16,000.............. $16,000
Claire’s Social Security income.......................................................- $6,300
Allowable deduction ........................................................................  $9,700
Surviving Spouse
A surviving spouse may be eligible to claim this deduction. There is no 
age requirement for the surviving spouse. 
To figure the deduction, begin with the taxable amount of civil service 
annuity income or $16,000, whichever is less. Subtract from that 
amount any Social Security income and tier 1 and tier 2 Railroad 
Retirement income (issued by the Railroad Retirement Board) the 
surviving spouse received. 
Example. Marie is a surviving spouse. The taxable amount of her civil 
service annuity is $14,500, and she received $1,200 in Social Security 
income. 
Here is how to figure Marie’s deduction.
Lesser of the taxable amount of the annuity or $16,000.............. $14,500
Marie’s Social Security income.......................................................- $1,200
Allowable deduction ....................................................................... $13,300
You must maintain Form CSA 1099-R with your records as DOR can 
require you to provide it at a later date. 
For more information about this deduction see Income Tax 
Information Bulletin #6 at www.in.gov/dor/files/ib06.pdf. 
Enter code 601 on Schedule 2 under line 11 if claiming this deduction.
Disability Retirement Deduction  602
To take this deduction you must have been:
	•
Permanently and totally disabled at the time of retirement,
	•
Retired on disability before the end of the tax year, and
	•
Received disability retirement income during the tax year.
If you meet these qualifications, you must complete Schedule IT-2440 
and have it signed by your doctor to claim this deduction. You must 
maintain the completed Schedule IT-2440 with your records as DOR 
can require you to provide it at a later date.
For more information about this deduction see Income Tax 
Information Bulletin #70 at www.in.gov/dor/files/ib70.pdf and 
Schedule IT-2440 at www.in.gov/dor/tax-forms/individual/current.
This deduction is limited to a maximum of $5,200 per qualifying 
individual.
Note. Social Security disability income does not qualify for this 
deduction because Indiana does not tax this income.
Enter code 602 on Schedule 2 under line 11 if claiming this deduction.
Employer Student Loan Payment Interest 
Deduction  637
If you are required to add back employer-paid student loan payment 
using Code 148, you are permitted to deduct the amount of student 
loan interest that:
	•
Was paid by your employer, and
	•
You would have been permitted to deduct if federal law did not 
disallow that deduction.
Complete Worksheet 4-1 provided in IRS Publication 970 to 
determine the amount (if any) of additional interest allowable for 
Indiana purposes, but not in excess of $2,500 total. When completing 
Worksheet 4-1, do not add back amounts required to be added to 
Indiana adjusted gross income using Code 148. This deduction cannot 
exceed the amount you are required to add back using Code 148.
Enterprise Zone Employee Deduction  603
Certain areas within Indiana have been designated as enterprise zones. 
Enterprise zones are established to encourage investment and job 
growth in distressed urban areas.
Schedule 2: Deductions Continued


--- Page 21 ---

IT-40 Booklet 2024
Page 21
Enterprise zones have been established in areas of certain cities/
locations. Visit www.aiez.org to look up contact information for a 
particular enterprise zone.
Your employer will provide Form IT-40QEC to you if you are eligible 
to claim this deduction. The amount of the deduction is one-half of 
the earned income shown on Form IT-40QEC or $7,500, whichever is 
less. If you and your spouse both have received Form IT-40QEC, you 
may each take this deduction for a combined maximum of $15,000 
(no more than $7,500 per qualifying person).
Enter code 603 on Schedule 2 under line 11 if claiming this deduction.
Government or Civic Group Capital Contribution 
Deduction  633 
A deduction is available for certain capital contributions made by a 
government or civic group. Deduct any eligible contributions as listed 
on a Schedule K-1 you received from an S corporation, or from an 
estate or trust that owns a portion of an S corporation AND through 
which you are receiving a distribution. You must maintain a copy of 
the Schedule K-1(s) with your records as DOR can require you to 
provide it at a later date. 
Enter code 633 on Schedule 2 under line 11 if claiming this deduction.
Health Care Sharing Ministry Deduction  643
If you paid an amount for membership in a health sharing ministry, as 
defined by IC 27-1-2.1-1, you may claim a deduction for the amount 
paid for membership in a health sharing ministry. Deduct only 
the amounts paid for membership. Do not use this code to deduct 
amounts for unreimbursed health care expenses.
Human Services Deduction  605
The human services deduction is intended to eliminate any individual 
income tax imposed on Medicaid recipients who are living in a:
	•
Hospital,
	•
Skilled nursing facility,
	•
Intermediate care facility,
	•
Licensed county home,
	•
Licensed boarding or residential home, or
	•
Certified Christian Science facility.* 
The goal of the human services tax deduction is to reduce the affected 
individual’s adjusted gross income tax liability to zero (-0-).
*An eligible Christian Science facility must be listed with and certified 
by the Commission for Accreditation of Christian Science Nursing 
Organizations/Facilities, Inc.
Generally, the deduction should not be used in conjunction with most 
tax credits in order to create a refund. If you are a Medicaid recipient 
and live in one of the facilities listed above, to determine whether you 
are eligible for the deduction you must first prepare your tax return 
without claiming a human services deduction. Generally, if a refund 
is due, you are not eligible for a deduction. File your return without 
claiming the deduction and a refund will be issued. However, if an 
amount is due, you are eligible to use a deduction. 
Enter code 605 on Schedule 2 under line 11 if claiming this deduction.
Indiana Education Scholarship Account Deduction  635
A deduction is available if you received an annual grant amount 
distributed to your Indiana education scholarship account that is 
used to pay for qualified expenses. See IC 20-51.4-2-9 for a list of 
qualified expenses. Do not deduct any grants that are not included in 
your federal gross income. Also, if the grant is used to pay for items 
other than qualified expenses, do not deduct the amount of those 
payments.
Indiana Enrichment Scholarship Account Deduction  638
A deduction is available if you received an annual grant amount 
distributed to your Indiana enrichment scholarship account that is 
used to pay for qualified expenses. Qualified expenses are enrichment 
materials, activities, or programs approved by the Indiana Department 
of Education to improve student proficiency in math or reading. Do 
not deduct any grants that are not included in your federal gross 
income. Also, if the grant is used to pay for items other than qualified 
expenses, do not deduct the amount of those payments.
Indiana Lottery Winnings Annuity Deduction  629
You may be eligible to deduct annuity payments received from a 
winning Hoosier Lottery ticket for a lottery held prior to July 1, 2002. 
This deduction applies only to prizes won from the Hoosier Lottery 
Commission; proceeds from other state lotteries or from other 
gambling sources, such as casinos, are not deductible. In addition, 
proceeds from winning Hoosier Lottery tickets for lotteries held after 
June 30, 2002, are not deductible. 
Example. Jennifer won $2,000,000 playing the Hoosier Lottery with 
a ticket purchased in June of 2002. She elected to receive annual 
installment payments of $100,000. Since Jennifer reported her 
$100,000 annuity payment on her federal tax return this year, she is 
eligible to claim a $100,000 deduction.
Note. Individuals or entities that have purchased Hoosier Lottery 
prizes from a winning ticket holder for valuable consideration are not 
eligible for this deduction.
Enter code 629 on Schedule 2 under line 11 if claiming this deduction.
Indiana-only Tax-exempt Bonds Deduction  636
If you had interest from a bond issued by or in the name of certain 
Indiana government subdivisions or entities or amounts received 
upon redemption or maturity of the bond, deduct any interest or other 
income included in federal gross income. Do not deduct any bond 
interest that is excluded from federal gross income. In addition, if you 
sell the bond, do not deduct any amounts for which the bond is sold in 
excess of your purchase price. See IC 6-8-5-1 for further information 
regarding the deduction.
Indiana Partnership Long-Term Care Policy Premiums 
Deduction  608
You may take a deduction for the amount of premiums paid for 
Indiana partnership long-term care insurance. If you are a married 
individual filing separately, you may not claim a deduction for 
amounts paid by or on behalf of your spouse.
Schedule 2: Deductions Continued


--- Page 22 ---

IT-40 Booklet 2024
Page 22
Important. The Indiana partnership policy will have the following box 
of information on the outline of coverage, the application or on the 
front page of the policy.
This policy qualifies under the Indiana Long-Term Care program for 
Medicaid Asset Protection. This policy may provide benefits in excess of 
the asset protection provided in the Indiana Long-Term Care program.
If the information shown in the box above is not located in a box on 
your policy, you do not have a qualifying policy, and are not eligible 
to take this deduction. The deduction is the amount of premiums paid 
during the year on the policy for the taxpayer and/or spouse.
No double benefit allowed. Certain self-employed individuals will 
claim these premiums as a deduction on federal Form 1040/1040-SR. 
The Indiana deduction will be the actual amount of these premiums 
paid, minus any amount of these already reported on federal Form 
1040/1040-SR.
More information about this program is available at www.in.gov/iltcp.
Important. Keep a copy of the premium statements as DOR can 
require you to provide this information. Enter code 608 on Schedule 2 
under line 11 if claiming this deduction.
Infrastructure Fund Gift Deduction  631
A deduction is available for certain contributions made to a regional 
development infrastructure fund. You should keep detailed records of 
the contribution as DOR can require you to provide this information 
at a later date. 
Enter code 631 on Schedule 2 under line 11 if claiming this deduction. 
Military Retirement Income and/or Survivor’s Benefits 
Deduction  632
The income on line 1 of Form IT-40 may include military retirement 
income and/or survivor’s benefits. If it does, you (and/or your spouse, 
if married filing jointly and both qualify) may be eligible to take this 
deduction. For 2022 and later, the deduction is equal to the entire 
amount of military retirement income and/or survivor’s benefits.
Important. You must enclose your military retirement income 
statement(s) and/or survivor’s benefit statement(s) with the tax return 
if you are claiming this deduction.
For more information about this deduction see Income Tax 
Information Bulletin #6 at www.in.gov/dor/files/ib06.pdf.
National Guard and Reserve Component Members 
Deduction  621 
Beginning in 2023, regular military income for National Guard 
members and armed force reserve members is eligible for a full 
deduction for their military income under this code. Do not deduct 
this income using any other line or three-digit code. Unlike the 
Military Service Deduction on line 7, this deduction does not have a 
dollar limit. 
Who is Eligible? 
You must be a member of the reserve components of:
	•
the Army;
	•
the Navy;
	•
the Air Force;
	•
the Coast Guard;
	•
the Marine Corps; or
	•
the Merchant Marine.
Or, a member of:
	•
the Indiana Army National Guard; or
	•
the Indiana Air National Guard.
What is Eligible to be Deducted? 
If you are eligible, your deduction is your military income received for 
service in the reserve component of the armed forces or in the Indiana 
National Guard. Deployment, mobilization, or federalization is no 
longer required to be eligible for this deduction for 2023 and later.
Do not deduct income received:
	•
As a civilian member of the armed forces or National Guard.
	•
As a member of an active duty component of the armed forces.
	•
From employment or any other source outside the National 
Guard or reserve components of the armed forces.
Note. Military income received due to service in a combat zone is not 
taxable on your federal or state income tax returns. Since Indiana is 
not taxing this income, your combat zone income is not eligible for 
this deduction. 
Note. You cannot claim both this deduction and the Military Service 
Deduction (see page 18) based on the same income. 
Get Income Tax Information Bulletin #27 at www.in.gov/dor/files/ib27.pdf 
for more information concerning this deduction. 
Enter code 621 on Schedule 2 under line 11 if claiming this deduction.
Olympic/Paralympic Medal Winners Deduction  627
You are eligible for a deduction if you won a gold, silver and/or 
bronze medal from participating in the Olympic/Paralympic games. 
The deduction equals the value of the medal(s) won plus the amount 
of income received during the taxable year from the United States 
Olympic Committee as prize money for winning the Olympic 
medal(s). If these amounts were previously deducted or excluded in 
determining your federal adjusted gross income, you are not permitted 
this deduction for the amounts that were excluded or deducted in 
determining your federal adjusted gross income. This deduction may 
be claimed only in the tax year in which the medal was won. 
Enter code 627 on Schedule 2 under line 11 if claiming this deduction.
Qualified Patents Income Exemption Deduction  622
Some of the income from qualified patents included in federal taxable 
income may be exempt from Indiana adjusted gross income tax. A 
qualified patent is a utility patent or a plant patent issued after Dec. 
31, 2007, for an invention resulting from a development process 
conducted in Indiana. The term does not include a design patent. 
Schedule 2: Deductions Continued


--- Page 23 ---

IT-40 Booklet 2024
Page 23
You must maintain the completed Schedule IN-PAT with your records 
as DOR can require you to provide it at a later date. You may get 
Schedule IN-PAT at www.in.gov/dor/tax-forms/individual/current.
For more information about this deduction see Income Tax 
Information Bulletin #104 at www.in.gov/dor/files/ib104.pdf. 
Enter code 622 on Schedule 2 under line 11 if claiming this deduction.
Railroad Unemployment and Sickness Benefits 
Deduction  624
Benefits issued by the U.S. Railroad Retirement Board are not taxable 
by Indiana. 
Deduct unemployment and/or sick pay benefits issued by the U.S. 
Railroad Retirement Board on this line if:
	•
You included these benefits as taxable income on your federal tax 
return, and 
	•
You did not already deduct these benefits on Schedule 2, lines 5 
and/or 6. 
Do not include any supplemental sick pay benefits on this line.
Make sure to keep the statements (such as Form 1099G) issued by the 
U.S. Railroad Retirement Board as DOR may request them at a later 
date. 
Enter code 624 on Schedule 2 under line 11 if claiming this deduction.
Recovery of Deductions  616
You are not eligible for this deduction if you did not complete the 
“other income” line on Schedule 1 of your federal Form 1040/1040-SR.
Generally, Indiana does not allow you to claim itemized deductions 
from IRS Form 172, Part 1, or the equivalent worksheet from IRS 
Publication 536. However, if you reported recovered itemized 
deductions as “other income” on line 8 of your federal Schedule 1, 
enter that amount on this line. A recovery is a return of an amount 
you deducted in an earlier year. The most common recoveries are 
refunds (see Indiana’s Schedule 2, line 3), reimbursements and rebates 
of deductions previously itemized on IRS Form 172, Part 1, or the 
equivalent worksheet from IRS Publication 536. 
Enter code 616 on Schedule 2 under line 11 if claiming this deduction.
Repayment of Previously Taxed Income Deduction  630
You may be eligible to claim a deduction for the repayment of 
previously taxed income, also known as “claim of right,” if:
	•
You reported the income to Indiana in a previous year,
	•
You repaid some or all of it this year, and
	•
For federal tax purposes, you are eligible to:
	ο
claim the repayment as an itemized deduction, or 
	ο
claim a credit based on the repayment amount.
Example 1. Ryan was a full-year Indiana resident in 2023, and received 
$1,700 unemployment compensation that year. He reported the full 
amount on his 2023 federal and Indiana income tax returns. In March 
of 2024 Ryan found out he had to repay $345 of that compensation; he 
repaid it that summer. For 2024 federal tax purposes he is eligible to 
claim an itemized deduction* based on the $345 amount repaid. Ryan 
is eligible to claim the $345 amount as a repayment of previously taxed 
income as a deduction on his 2024 state tax return.
*In this example, Ryan is not required to claim itemized deductions 
when figuring his federal taxable income for 2024; he cannot claim 
miscellaneous itemized deductions for federal purposes. Regardless, 
he is still eligible to claim the deduction on his state tax return.
Note. An adjustment will need to be made if an unemployment 
compensation deduction was claimed on the return in the year the 
income was reported. To do this, reduce the amount previously 
reported by the amount repaid; refigure the deduction based on the 
reduced amount. Subtract the difference from the repayment amount 
to be deducted. 
Example 1, continued. Ryan claimed a $73 unemployment 
compensation deduction on his 2023 state tax return. He refigured 
the deduction based on the reduced $1,355 compensation ($1,700 - 
$345), which reduced the deduction by $15. Ryan will report the $330 
net difference ($345 repayment minus the $15 reduced deduction 
amount) as the repayment of previously taxed income deduction.
Important. While no corresponding state credit for the repayment of 
previously taxed income is available, a deduction based on the amount 
repaid is.
Example 2. In 2024 Cynthia repaid $3,400 of income originally 
reported on her 2023 federal and Indiana state tax returns. She 
claimed a credit on her 2024 federal tax return based on the $3,400 
amount repaid. Cynthia is eligible to claim the $3,400 amount as a 
deduction.
Important. Indiana does not tax Social Security income. Therefore, 
any amount of Social Security income repaid in a subsequent year is 
not eligible for a deduction (since Indiana has not previously taxed 
this income).
Note. Keep a copy of your records detailing the required repayment as 
DOR can require you to provide this information at a later date.
Enter code 630 on Schedule 2 under line 11 if claiming this deduction.
Small Employer Health Insurance Premium 
Deduction  639
If you:
	•
Claimed a federal tax credit for small employer health insurance 
premiums under IRC section 45R; and 
	•
Would have been permitted a deduction for those premiums 
except for the disallowance under IRC section 280C(h),
you are permitted a deduction for the portion of the premiums 
disallowed for federal purposes. Use Code 639 to enter the amount of 
premiums for which a deduction was disallowed for federal purposes 
because you claimed a federal tax credit for small employer health 
insurance premiums.
Schedule 2: Deductions Continued


--- Page 24 ---

IT-40 Booklet 2024
Page 24
Specified Research and Experimental Expenses 
Deduction  641
If you claimed a federal income tax deduction for specified research 
and experimental expenses that are required to be amortized for 
federal purposes pursuant to IRC section 174, deduct the amount 
of expenses paid or incurred in the current taxable year for federal 
income tax purposes. See the instructions for Code 154 for further 
information on the amount of expenses required to be added back. 
Do not claim this deduction for any research expenses for which a 
deduction is disallowed under IRC section 280C(c).
Note. If after printing of this bulletin, IRC Section 174 is amended to 
allow immediate expensing of research and experimental expenses 
and you elect to amortize those expenses, you cannot use this code 
and Code 154 to accelerate the allowance of your expenses.
Example. Individual A incurred $100,000 of specified research 
expenses in 2024. Individual A reported $10,000 of amortized 
expenses in 2024. Individual A will use Code 641 to report $100,000 
allowable for Indiana purposes and use Code 154 to add back the 
$10,000 claimed for federal purposes. For 2025-2029, Individual A will 
continue to use Code 154 to report timing differences.
Exemptions
Exemptions may be claimed on the Indiana return. Categories include 
exemptions for:
1.	
You, and your spouse, if married filing jointly
2.	
Certain dependents
3.	
Certain dependent children (additional)
4.	
Certain adopted children
5.	
Age 65 or older and/or blind
6.	
Additional age 65 or older (based on income)
While you will need to complete Schedule 3 to list all of your 
exemptions, you will also need to complete Schedule IN-DEP if 
claiming any dependents. If you are claiming any adopted dependents, 
you will also need to complete Schedule IN-DEP-A.
Schedule 3: Exemptions
Line-by-line instructions.
Line 1 – Exemptions for taxpayer, spouse (if married 
filing jointly)
If you are married filing jointly, enter $2,000 on this line. All other 
filers* should enter $1,000 on this line. 
*Important. Enter $1,000 on this line even if you are claimed on 
someone else’s tax return, such as a parent or guardian.
Lines 2 and 3 – Exemptions for dependents; 
Additional exemptions for certain dependent children 
Read the following information to see if you are eligible to claim any 
dependents. If you are, complete Schedule IN-DEP after reviewing 
these steps: 
	•
Step 1 Do You Have a Qualifying Child?
	•
Step 2 Is Your Qualifying Child Your Dependent?
	•
Step 3 Is Your Qualifying Relative Your Dependent?
Step 1 Do You Have a Qualifying Child?
A qualifying child is a child who is your…
Son, daughter, stepchild, foster child, brother, sister, stepbrother, 
stepsister, half brother, half sister, or a descendant of any of them (for 
example, your grandchild, niece, or nephew)
AND, was…
	•
Under age 19 at the end of the year and younger than you (or your 
spouse, if filing jointly), or
	•
Under age 24 at the end of the year, a student (defined later), and 
younger than you (or your spouse, if filing jointly), or
	•
Any age and permanently and totally disabled (defined later)
AND, who…
	•
Didn’t provide over half of his or her own support for the year 
(see Income Tax Information Bulletin #117),
	•
Is not filing a joint return for the year, or is filing a joint return 
for the year only as a claim for refund of withheld income tax or 
estimated tax paid (see Income Tax Information Bulletin #117 for 
details and examples),
	•
Lived with you for more than half the year. If the child didn’t live with 
you for the required time, see Exception to time lived with you, later.
Caution. If the child meets the conditions to be a qualifying child of any 
other person (other than your spouse if filing a joint return) for the year, or 
the child was married, see Qualifying child of more than one person, later.
Do you have a child who meets the conditions to be your qualifying child?
Yes. Go to Step 2.
No. Go to Step 3.
Step 2 Is Your Qualifying Child Your Dependent?
1.	
Was the child a U.S. citizen, U.S. national, U.S. resident alien, or 
a resident of Canada or Mexico? (See Income Tax Information 
Bulletin #117 for the definition of a U.S. national or U.S. resident 
alien. If the child was adopted, see Exception to citizen test, later.)
Yes. Continue.
No. STOP. You cannot claim this child as a dependent.
2.	
Was the child married?
Yes. See Married Person, later.
No. Continue.
3.	
Could you, or your spouse if filing jointly, be claimed as a 
dependent on someone else’s tax return? See Steps 1 and 2.
Yes. STOP. You cannot claim any dependents.
No. You can claim this child as a dependent. See Schedule IN-DEP 
instructions below.
Schedule 3: Exemptions


--- Page 25 ---

IT-40 Booklet 2024
Page 25
Step 3 Is Your Qualifying Relative Your Dependent?
A qualifying relative is a person who is your…
	•
Son, daughter, stepchild, foster child, or a descendant of any of 
them (for example, your grandchild), or 
	•
Brother, sister, half brother, half sister, or a son or daughter of any 
of them (for example, your niece, or nephew), or
	•
Father, mother, or an ancestor or sibling of either of them (for 
example, your grandmother, grandfather, aunt or uncle), or
	•
Any other person (other than your spouse) who lived with you 
all of the year as a member of your household if your relationship 
does not violate local law. If the person did not live with you for 
the required time, see Exception to time lived with you, later.
AND, who…
	•
Was not a qualifying child (see Step 1) of any taxpayer during the 
year. For this purpose, a person isn’t a taxpayer if he or she isn’t 
required to file a U.S. income tax return and either doesn’t file 
such a return or files only to get a refund of withheld income tax 
or estimated tax paid. See Income Tax Information Bulletin #117 
for details and examples.
	•
Had gross income of less than $4,400 during the year. If the 
person was permanently and totally disabled, see Exception to 
gross income test, later.
AND, for whom …
You provided over half of his or her support during the year. But see 
Children of divorced or separated parents, Multiple support agreements, 
and Kidnapped child, later.
1.	
Does any person meet the conditions to be your qualifying relative?
Yes. Continue.
No. STOP. You cannot claim this person as a dependent.
2.	
Was your qualifying relative a U.S. citizen, a U.S. national, U.S. resident 
alien, or a resident of Canada or Mexico? (See federal Publication 
519 for the definition of a U.S. national or U.S. resident alien.) If your 
qualifying relative was adopted, see Exception to citizen test, later.
Yes. Continue
No. STOP. You cannot claim this person as a dependent.
3.	
Was your qualifying relative married?
Yes. See Married person, later.
No. Continue.
4.	
Could you or your spouse if filing jointly, be claimed as a dependent 
on someone else’s tax return this year? See Steps 1 and 2.
Yes. STOP. You cannot claim any dependents.
No. You can claim this person as a dependent. See Schedule IN-DEP 
instructions below.
If you are eligible to claim one or more dependent from Step 2 
and/or Step 3, complete Schedule IN-DEP. If one or more claimed 
dependent is adopted, see instructions for IN-DEP-A.
Line 4 – Age 65 or Older or Blind
If you and/or your spouse (if filing a joint return) are age 65 or older, 
you and/or your spouse can take an additional $1,000 exemption. If 
you and/or your spouse (if filing a joint return) are legally blind, you 
and/or your spouse can take an additional $1,000 exemption. Place an 
“X” in the boxes that apply to you and/or your spouse. Enter the total 
number of boxes marked on this line and multiply by $1,000.
Line 5 – Additional Exemption for Age 65 or Older
An additional $500 exemption is available for you and/or your spouse 
(if filing a joint return) if you are age 65 or older and the amount on 
Form IT-40, line 1, is less than $40,000 (or if you are married filing 
separately and the amount on Form IT-40, line 1 is less than $20,000). 
Place an “X” in the boxes that apply to you and/or your spouse. Enter 
the total number of boxes marked on this line and multiply by $500.
Line 6 – Additional Exemptions for Adopted Child
If you are claiming additional exemptions for one or more qualifying 
adopted children, enter the number of qualifying children listed on 
Schedule IN-DEP-A. Do not enter the number of boxes marked for 
parents.
Schedule IN-DEP Instructions
You must complete and enclose Schedule IN-DEP if you are claiming 
any dependents on lines 2 and/or 3 of Schedule 3.
Question 1. Did you answer “No” to STEP 2, question 3 above? If so, 
you are eligible to claim the qualifying child (children) as a dependent. 
Read the Lines 1 through 4 instructions below. If not, skip to Question 
2 below.
Lines 1 through 4
For each qualified dependent child, enter his or her:
	•
First and last name in Box A and Box B.
	•
Nine-digit Social Security number (SSN) in Box C.
	•
Date of birth in Box D.
See Additional Dependent Exemptions below to determine whether or 
not to complete line E and line F. 
Example 1. Cooper and Grace Doe are eligible to claim their daughter 
Tatum as a dependent on Schedule IN-DEP. Here is how they will 
complete line 1:
Box
Dep. First Name
Box
Dep. Last Name
1A
Tatum
1B
Doe
Box
Dependent’s SSN
Box
Dependent’s DOB
1C
123 45 6789
1D
06 01 2012
Question 2. Did you answer “No” to STEP 3, question 4 above? If so, 
you are eligible to claim the qualifying relative as a dependent.
Schedule IN-DEP Instructions


--- Page 26 ---

IT-40 Booklet 2024
Page 26
For each qualified relative, enter his or her:
	•
First and last name in Box A and Box B.
	•
Nine-digit Social Security number (SSN) in Box C.
	•
Date of birth in Box D.
Example 2. Cooper and Grace Doe (see Example 1 above) are also 
eligible to claim Grace’s grandmother, Irene Smith, who lives with 
them, as a dependent. Here is how they will complete line 2:
Box
Dep. First Name
Box
Dep. Last Name
2A
Irene
2B
Smith
Box
Dependent’s SSN
Box
Dependent’s DOB
2C
987 65 4321
2D
10 15 1940
Line 5
Add the qualified dependents listed on lines 1 through 4, and enter the 
total in Box 5. Then, enter this amount in the box on Schedule 3, line 2.
Additional Dependent Exemptions 
Read below to see if you are eligible to claim an additional dependent 
exemption for a dependent child (children) listed on lines 1 through 4.
An additional $1,500 exemption is allowed for certain dependent 
children. Carefully read the following Dependent child definition below 
to see if you are eligible for this additional exemption(s).
If a taxpayer is claiming a child as a dependent for the first taxable 
year in which the additional dependent exemption is allowable for that 
child, the taxpayer is permitted to claim an amount of $3,000 instead 
of $1,500 for one tax year. This exemption is not permitted if the child 
could have been claimed for the $1,500 exemption in any previous 
year, regardless of whether the child had been claimed.
Dependent child definition. According to state statute, to be eligible 
for this exemption a dependent child must be a son, stepson, daughter, 
stepdaughter, foster child*, child for whom you are a legal guardian, 
and/or your spouse’s child, if filing a joint return. He/she must be 
either under the age of 19 by the end of the tax year, or be a full-time 
student who is under the age of 24 by the end of the tax year.
*The foster child must have lived with you the entire year in order to 
meet eligibility requirements for purposes of claiming the additional 
dependent exemption.
If any dependent included in Box 5 on this schedule also meets the 
Dependent child definition above, place an “X” in box E on the line 
where the dependent is listed (see following example). 
In addition, if the dependent is eligible to be claimed for the additional 
child exemption for the first time, place an “X” in box F where the 
dependent is listed. Add the number of box E’s and box F’s containing 
an “X”. Enter that number in Box 6, which is located at the bottom of 
the schedule.
Example 3. Cooper and Grace Doe (see Example 1 above) are eligible 
to claim the additional dependent exemption for their daughter Tatum. 
They should enter an “X” on Line 1E.
Box Dep. First Name
Box Dep. Last Name
Box
1A
Tatum
1B
Doe
Box Dependent’s SSN
Box Dependent’s DOB
Box
1C
123 45 6789
1D
06 01 2012
1E
Additional dependent child exemption 1E
X
Note. Not all dependent children are eligible for this additional 
exemption. For instance, you may have included a grandson as a 
dependent in Box 5. However, if he doesn’t meet the qualification of 
being a foster child or a child for whom you are a legal guardian, you 
will not be able to claim the additional exemption for him on Box 6.
Line 6
Add the number of any additional dependent child exemptions located 
in boxes 1E and 1F through 4E and 4F. Enter the total in Box 6. Then, 
enter this amount in the box on Schedule 3, line 3.
Claiming more than four dependents
If you are claiming more than four dependents, include an additional 
Schedule IN-DEP. Make sure to add the additional information to the 
totals on the first schedule, Boxes 5 and 6, where applicable.
Example 4. June has five dependents. She entered information for her 
fifth dependent on line 1 on a second Schedule IN-DEP. She added 
the dependent claimed on the second schedule to the four claimed 
on the first schedule, and entered “5” on the first Schedule IN-DEP, 
Box 5. She made sure to include the second schedule with her filing. 
Likewise, she would include the fifth dependent in the total listed in 
Box 6 if the child listed on the second Schedule IN-DEP qualified for 
the additional dependent child exemption.
Schedule IN-DEP-A Instructions
You must complete and enclose Schedule IN-DEP-A if you are claiming 
any additional exemption for adopted children. These children are also 
required to be listed on Schedule IN-DEP.
To claim this exemption for an adopted child, the adoption of the child 
must be finalized before the end of the taxable year.
Lines 1 through 5
For each adopted dependent, enter his or her:
	•
First and last name in Box A and Box B
	•
Nine-digit Social Security number (SSN) in Box C
	•
Date of birth in Box D
	•
If the first listed taxpayer on the return is an adoptive parent of 
the child, check Box E
	•
If the second listed taxpayer on the return is an adoptive parent of 
the child, check Box F
Note. An adopted child can only qualify for the additional adopted 
child exemption if the child also meets the requirements for an 
additional child exemption on Schedule IN-DEP. If Box E on Schedule 
IN-DEP for the adopted child is not checked, the additional adopted 
child dependent exemption also will be disallowed.
Schedule IN-DEP-A Instructions


--- Page 27 ---

IT-40 Booklet 2024
Page 27
If both parents are adoptive parents of the child, only one additional 
adopted child dependent deduction is permitted for that child.
This exemption may not be claimed by a non-adoptive parent (e.g., a 
biological parent of child adopted by a stepparent) unless the adoptive 
parent files a joint return with the non-adoptive parent.
If you are claiming more than five additional adopted child 
exemptions, include an additional Schedule IN-DEP-A. Include the 
additional information to the total on the first schedule, Box 6, where 
applicable.
Definitions and Special Rules for Dependents
Important. 
	•
Various Internal Revenue Service (IRS) forms and publications 
you may need can be found online at  
https://apps.irs.gov/app/picklist/list/formsInstructions.html.
	•
Indiana’s Income Tax Information Bulletin #117 can be found 
online at www.in.gov/dor/files/ib117.pdf.
Adopted child. An adopted child is always treated as your own child. 
An adopted child includes a child lawfully placed with you for legal 
adoption. 
Adoption taxpayer identification numbers (ATINs). If you have a 
dependent who was placed with you for legal adoption and you don’t 
know his or her SSN, you must get an ATIN for the dependent from 
the IRS. Get federal Form W-7A for details. If the dependent isn’t a 
U.S. citizen or resident alien, apply for an ITIN instead, using federal 
Form W-7.
Children of divorced or separated parents. A child will be treated as 
the qualifying child or qualifying relative of his or her noncustodial 
parent (defined later) if all of the following conditions apply. 
1.	
The parents are divorced, legally separated, separated under a 
written separation agreement, or lived apart at all times during 
the last 6 months of the year (whether or not they are or were 
married). 
2.	
The child received over half of his or her support for the year from 
the parents (and the rules on Multiple support agreements, later, 
do not apply). Support of a child received from a parent’s spouse 
is treated as provided by the parent. 
3.	
The child is in custody of one or both of the parents for more than 
half of the year.
4.	
Either of the following applies. 
a.	
The custodial parent signs federal Form 8332 or a 
substantially similar statement that he or she won’t claim 
the child as a dependent for the year, and the noncustodial 
parent maintains a copy of the signed federal Form 8332 with 
his or her records (as DOR can require this to be provided at 
a later date). If the divorce decree or separation agreement 
went into effect after 1984 and before 2009, the noncustodial 
parent may be able to include certain pages from the decree 
or agreement instead of federal Form 8332. See Post-1984 
and pre-2009 decree or agreement and Post-2008 decree or 
agreement. 
b.	
A pre-1985 decree of divorce or separate maintenance or 
written separation agreement between the parents provides 
that the noncustodial parent can claim the child as a 
dependent, and the noncustodial parent provides at least 
$600 for support of the child during the year.
If conditions (1) through (4) apply, only the noncustodial parent can 
claim the child for purposes of the dependency. 
Custodial and noncustodial parents. The custodial parent is the 
parent with whom the child lived for the greater number of nights in 
the year. The noncustodial parent is the other parent. If the child was 
with each parent for an equal number of nights, the custodial parent is 
the parent with the higher federal AGI. See Income Tax Information 
Bulletin #117 for an exception for a parent who works at night, rules 
for a child who is emancipated under state law, and other details. 
Post-1984 and pre-2009 decree or agreement. The decree or 
agreement must state all three of the following. 
1.	
The noncustodial parent can claim the child as a dependent 
without regard to any condition, such as payment of support. 
2.	
The other parent will not claim the child as a dependent. 
3.	
The years for which the claim is released.
The noncustodial parent must maintain with his or her records a copy 
of all of the following pages from the decree or agreement as DOR can 
require these to be provided at a later date. 
	•
Cover page (include the other parent’s SSN on that page). 
	•
The pages that include all the information identified in (1) 
through (3) above. 
	•
Signature page with the other parent’s signature and date of 
agreement.
Post-2008 decree or agreement. If the divorce decree or separation 
agreement went into effect after 2008, the noncustodial parent cannot 
include pages from the decree or agreement instead of federal Form 
8332. The custodial parent must sign either federal Form 8332 or a 
substantially similar statement the only purpose of which is to release 
the custodial parent’s claim to an exemption for a child, and the 
noncustodial parent must include a copy with his or her return. The 
form or statement must release the custodial parent’s claim to the child 
without any conditions. For example, the release must not depend on 
the noncustodial parent paying support. 
Release of exemption revoked. A custodial parent who has revoked his 
or her previous release of a claim to exemption for a child must maintain 
with his or her records a copy of the revocation as DOR can require this 
to be provided at a later date. For details, see federal Form 8332. 
Exception to citizen test. If you are a U.S. citizen or U.S. national 
and your adopted child lived with you all year as a member of your 
household, that child meets the requirement to be a U.S. citizen in Step 
2, question 1.
Exception to gross income test. If your relative (including a person 
who lived with you all year as a member of your household) is 
permanently and totally disabled (defined later), certain income for 
services performed at a sheltered workshop may be excluded for this 
test. For details, see Income Tax Information Bulletin #117.
Definitions and Special Rules for Dependents


--- Page 28 ---

IT-40 Booklet 2024
Page 28
Exception to time lived with you. Temporary absences by you or 
the other person for special circumstances, such as school, vacation, 
business, medical care, military service, or detention in a juvenile 
facility, count as time the person lived with you. Also see Children of 
divorced or separated parents, earlier, or Kidnapped child, later.
If the person meets all other requirements to be your qualifying child 
but was born or died during the year, the person is considered to have 
lived with you for more than half of the year if your home was this 
person’s home for more than half the time he or she was alive during the 
year. Any other person is considered to have lived with you for all of the 
year if the person was born or died during the year and your home was 
this person’s home for the entire time he or she was alive during the year. 
Foster child. A foster child is any child placed with you by an 
authorized placement agency or by judgment, decree, or other order of 
any court of competent jurisdiction.
Kidnapped child. If your child is presumed by law enforcement 
authorities to have been kidnapped by someone who is not a 
family member, you may be able to take the child into account in 
determining the dependency exemption. For details, see Income Tax 
Information Bulletin #117. 
Married person. If the person is married and files a joint return, you 
cannot claim that person as your dependent. However, if the person is 
married but does not file a joint return or files a joint return only to claim 
a refund of withheld income tax or estimated tax paid, you may be able to 
claim him or her as a dependent. (See Income Tax Information Bulletin 
#117 for details and examples.) In that case, go to Step 2, question 3 (for a 
qualifying child) or Step 3, question 4 (for a qualifying relative).
Multiple support agreements. If no one person contributed over 
half of the support of your relative (or a person who lived with you all 
year as a member of your household) but you and another person(s) 
provided more than half of your relative’s support, special rules may 
apply that would treat you as having provided over half of the support. 
For details, see Income Tax Information Bulletin #117.
Permanently and totally disabled. A person is permanently and 
totally disabled if, at any time during the year, the person cannot 
engage in any substantial gainful activity because of a physical or 
mental condition and a doctor has determined that this condition has 
lasted or can be expected to last continuously for at least a year or can 
be expected to lead to death.
Public assistance payments. If you received payments under the 
Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF) program or other 
public assistance program and you used the money to support another 
person, see Income Tax Information Bulletin #117.
Qualifying child of more than one person. Even if a child meets the 
conditions to be the qualifying child of more than one person, only 
one person can claim the child as a dependent. If you and any other 
person can claim the child as a dependent, the following rules apply:
	•
If only one of the persons is the child’s parent, the child is treated 
as the qualifying child of the parent;
	•
If the parents file a joint return together and can claim the child as 
a qualifying child, the child is treated as the qualifying child of the 
parents;
	•
If the parents do not file a joint return together but both parents 
claim the child as a qualifying child, DOR will treat the child as 
the qualifying child of the parent with whom the child lived for 
the longer period of time during the year. If the child lived with 
each parent for the same amount of time, DOR will treat the child 
as the qualifying child of the parent who had the higher federal 
AGI for the year;
	•
If no parent can claim the child as a qualifying child, the child is 
treated as the qualifying child of the person who had the highest 
federal AGI for the year;
	•
If a parent can claim the child as a qualifying child but chooses 
not to, the child is treated as the qualifying child of the person 
who had the highest federal AGI for the year, but only if that 
person’s federal AGI is higher than the highest federal AGI of any 
parent of the child who can claim the child.
Example. You, your daughter and your mother live together. Your 
daughter meets the conditions to be a qualifying child for both you 
and your mother. Your daughter doesn’t meet the conditions to be a 
qualifying child of any other person, including her other parent. Under 
the rules just described, you can claim your daughter as a dependent. 
Your mother cannot claim your daughter. However, if your mother’s 
federal AGI is higher than yours and you do not claim your daughter as 
a dependent, your daughter is the qualifying child of your mother.
For more details and examples, see Income Tax Information Bulletin #117.
Social Security Number. You must enter each dependent’s 9-digit 
Social Security number (SSN) on Schedule IN-DEP, Box C. Be sure the 
name and SSN entered agree with the dependent’s Social Security card. 
Otherwise, we may disallow the exemption claimed for the dependent. 
If the name or SSN on the dependent’s Social Security card is not 
correct or you need to get an SSN for your dependent, contact the 
Social Security Administration.
If your dependent child was born and died during the year and you do 
not have an SSN for the child, enter “Died” in Box C and keep a copy 
of the child’s birth certificate, death certificate, or hospital records as 
DOR can require you to provide these at a later date. The document 
must show the child was born alive.
Example.
Died
If you apply for an ATIN or an ITIN on or before the due date of your 
2024 return (including extensions) and the IRS issues you an ATIN or 
an ITIN as a result of the application, the IRS will consider your ATIN 
or ITIN as issued on or before the due date of your return.
Student. A student is a child who during any part of 5 calendar 
months of the tax year was enrolled as a full-time student at a school, 
or took a full-time, on-farm training course given by a school or 
a state, county, or local government agency. A school includes a 
technical, trade, or mechanical school. It does not include an on-the-
job training course, correspondence school, or school offering courses 
only through the Internet.
Definitions and Special Rules for Dependents Continued


--- Page 29 ---

IT-40 Booklet 2024
Page 29
Schedule 4: Other Taxes
Line 1 – Use Tax on Internet, Mail Order and/or Out-
Of-State Purchases
If you have purchased items while you were outside Indiana, through 
the mail (for instance, by catalog or offer through the mail), through 
radio or television advertising and/or over the Internet, these 
purchases may be subject to Indiana sales and use tax, if sales tax was 
not paid at the time of purchase. This tax, called “use” tax, is figured at 
7% (.07).
When you make purchases from a company in Indiana, that company 
is responsible for collecting the Indiana sales tax from you. When you 
make purchases from an out-of-state company, you are responsible 
for making sure the use tax is paid. Either the out-of-state company 
collects the tax from you, or you must pay the tax directly to the State 
of Indiana.
To calculate the amount of purchases subject to the use tax, multiply 
the total purchase price of all taxable purchases by 7% and enter the 
amount. If you paid sales tax to the state where the item was originally 
purchased, you are allowed a credit against your Indiana use tax for an 
amount paid up to 7%.
Line 2 – Household Employment Taxes
If you paid cash wages during 2024 to an individual who is not:
	•
Your spouse,
	•
Your child under age 21,
	•
Your parent,
	•
An employee under age 18; and
the individual worked in and around your home as a baby-sitter, 
nanny, health aide, private nurse, maid, caretaker, yard worker or 
someone who does similar domestic duties, then that individual may 
be defined as your employee.
See Federal Publication 926, Household Employer’s Tax Guide, for more 
information on how to define an employee. Visit www.irs.gov or call 
the IRS at 1-800-829-1040.
If you paid cash wages of $2,200 or more to a household worker 
who is your employee, or total cash wages of $1,000 or more in any 
calendar quarter of 2023 or 2024 to all household employees, you may 
have withheld state and county income taxes. To pay these taxes on 
your Indiana income tax return, contact DOR for Schedule IN-H, or 
download one from www.in.gov/dor/tax-forms/individual/current.
Line 3 – Recapture of certain Indiana offset credits
Indiana requires the recapture of certain offset credits if certain 
conditions are met. Currently, these credits include the Indiana 
CollegeChoice 529 Education Savings Plan Credit and the Historic 
Building Rehabilitation Credit.
	•
If contributions were made to an Indiana CollegeChoice 529 
education savings plan in which you are the account owner and 
you made a non-qualified withdrawal(s) from this plan during the 
tax year, you will probably have to repay some or all of any credits 
previously claimed.
	•
You may need to recapture some or all of the credits previously 
claimed for the Historic Building Rehabilitation Credit if you did 
not meet certain requirements. 
Complete and enclose Schedule IN-CR if you have an amount to be 
recaptured. Enter the total amount to be recaptured on line 3. Download 
Schedule IN-CR by visiting www.in.gov/dor/tax-forms/individual/current.
Schedule 5: Credits
Lines 1 and 2 – Indiana State and County Tax Withheld
If you are reporting any tax withheld on your behalf, report the 
Indiana state and local taxes on these lines. Report the state and 
county withholdings separately. Do not claim credit for taxes 
withheld for states other than Indiana or for localities outside 
Indiana. 
The amount of Indiana state tax withheld is usually shown in box 17 
and the amount of Indiana county tax withheld is usually shown in 
box 19 of your W-2s. Indiana state and county withholding amounts 
may also be present on other forms, including W-2Gs, various 1099s, 
Form IN MSID-A and Schedule IN K-1.
You must enclose your withholding statements, including W-2s, 
W-2Gs, 1099s, Form IN MSID-A and Schedule IN K-1s, with your 
tax return to verify Indiana state and county taxes claimed as being 
withheld. Failure to enclose these withholding statements will result 
in a reduced refund or increase in the amount you owe. In addition to 
the withholding statements, you must also enclose Schedule IN-W.
If you are filing a joint return, be sure to include your spouse’s 
withholding statements if they show Indiana state and/or county tax 
withholding amounts.
Important. The use of substitute W-2s will delay the processing of 
your return and may impact the issuance of any refund. 
A note about your withholding statements. It is important that any 
statement reporting withholding is readable. The state and county tax 
amounts withheld are verified on every withholding statement that 
comes in with your tax return. These amounts also should be reflected 
on Schedule IN-W. If you are not filing electronically, we encourage 
you to enclose the best copy available when you file.
In some cases, verification of withholding may be delayed if the 
business withholding the tax is late filing copies of withholding 
statements. 
Line 3 – Pass Through Entity Tax Credit
If you are claiming a credit for Indiana pass through entity tax, report 
the Pass Through Entity Tax (PTET) credited to you from Schedule IN 
K-1 or IT-41 Schedule IN K-1. You must include all Schedule IN K-1s 
reporting credit for PTET to verify the credit claim. Do not report 
PTET as withholding or estimated tax payments. Also, do not report 
PTET paid to another state or locality on this line.
Schedule 4: Other Taxes


--- Page 30 ---

IT-40 Booklet 2024
Page 30
Line 4 – 2024 Estimated Tax Paid
If you made estimated tax payments, enter the total paid for 2024 on 
this line. Also, include any extension payment made with Form IT-9 
Extension of Time to File for tax year 2024.
Note. Do not include on this line any estimated tax paid for tax year 2025.
Line 5 – Unified Tax Credit for the Elderly
This credit may be claimed during the same time period as any other 
refundable credit. The tax return must be filed and credit claimed 
within three years of the filing due date (including extensions) to be 
eligible for a refund.
This credit is available for certain low-income individuals who are age 
65 or older. You may be able to claim this credit if you and/or your 
spouse meet all the following requirements:
	•
You and/or your spouse must have been age 65 or older by Dec. 
31, 2024,
	•
If married and living together at any time during the year, you 
must file a joint return,
	•
The amount on line 1 of Form IT-40 must be less than $10,000,
	•
You must have been a resident of Indiana for at least six months 
during 2024, and
	•
You must not have been in prison for 180 days or more in 2024.
Note. Disabled persons under age 65 do not qualify for this credit.
How should you file to claim the credit?
You may claim the credit by filing the simplified Form SC-40* if your 
taxable income is low enough that you are not required to file Form 
IT-40. You will qualify if:
	•
You are single or widowed and your income on line 1 of Form IT-
40 is less than $2,500; or
	•
You are married with only one person age 65 or older and your 
income on line 1 of Form IT-40 is less than $3,500; or
	•
You are married with both persons age 65 or older and your 
income on line 1 of Form IT-40 is less than $5,000;
	•
You have no other credits, such as withholding or estimated tax 
credits.
*Visit our website at www.in.gov/dor/tax-forms/individual/current to 
get Form SC-40.
No double benefit allowed. If you qualify to file Form SC-40 and do 
so, then do not also file Form IT-40 and claim the credit a second time.
If you are required to file Form IT-40 you may claim the credit on 
Schedule 5, line 5. You can claim the credit on either Form IT-40 or 
Form SC-40, but file only one of these forms, and only file once. 
Important.
	•
If your spouse died after Jan. 1, 2024, you can claim this credit by 
filing a joint return.
	•
If a person dies and does not have a surviving spouse, then no one 
can claim the credit on behalf of the deceased person. 
To Figure Your Unified Tax Credit for the Elderly:
Use Table A if:
You meet all the requirements listed above, and:
	•
You are filing a joint return, lived with your spouse during the tax 
year, both were Indiana residents for at least six months and both 
were age 65 or older by Dec. 31, 2024, or
	•
Both you and your spouse met all the above-requirements and 
your spouse died after Jan. 1, 2024.
Table A
Joint Filers Both Age 65 or Older
If the income on Line 1 of 
Form IT-40 is:
Your Allowable 
Credit* is:
less than $1,000...................................................................................$140
between $1,000 and $2,999.................................................................$90
between $3,000 and $9,999.................................................................$80
Use Table B if:
You meet all the requirements listed above, and:
	•
You are age 65 or older and are single or widowed,
	•
You are filing a joint return and only one is age 65 or older, or
	•
You are filing a joint return and only one was an Indiana resident 
for at least six months, or you are married but did not live with 
your spouse during the tax year, are age 65 or older and are 
married filing separately.
Table B
Only One Person Age 65 or Older
If the income on Line 1 of 
Form IT-40 is:
Your Allowable 
Credit* is:
less than $1,000...................................................................................$100
between $1,000 and $2,999.................................................................$50
between $3,000 and $9,999.................................................................$40
*Once you have located your credit on Table A or Table B, enter that 
amount on line 5.
Remember to file either Form SC-40 or Form IT-40, but not both.
Line 6 – Indiana’s Earned Income Credit (EIC)
If you are eligible for an earned income credit on your federal tax 
return, you may be eligible for Indiana’s earned income credit, too. 
Here are some important things to know:
	•
You must be eligible for and have claimed an EIC on your federal 
tax return. If not, STOP. You are not eligible to claim Indiana’s 
EIC.
	•
Your income on Form IT-40, line 1 (or Indiana’s Schedule A, line 
36A), must be less than $66,819. If it is the same amount or more, 
STOP. You are not eligible to claim Indiana’s EIC.
	•
Schedule IN-EIC must be completed and enclosed by all filers 
claiming the EIC.
Your 2024 EIC will be your federal EIC multiplied by 10%. For the 
2024 tax year, Indiana follows all requirements and allowances for the 
federal EIC.
Schedule 5: Credits Continued


--- Page 31 ---

IT-40 Booklet 2024
Page 31
Line 7 – Lake County (Indiana) Residential Income 
Tax Credit
You may be eligible to claim a Lake County (Indiana) Residential 
Income Tax credit if you meet all three of the following requirements.
1.	
You paid property tax to Lake County (Indiana) on your 
residence. Your “residence” is your principal dwelling. You must 
either own or be buying the residence under contract, and must 
pay property tax to Lake County (Indiana) on that residence.
2.	
Your Modified Indiana Adjusted Gross Income is less than 
$18,600.
3.	
You are not claiming the Homeowner’s Residential Property Tax 
Deduction on Indiana Schedule 2, line 2. If you are claiming this 
credit, make sure to see the Final Step after Worksheet B in the 
next column.
Complete the following steps to see if you are eligible to claim this 
credit.
Step 1
	•
Did you pay property tax to Lake County (Indiana) on your 
residence during the year? ☐ Yes ☐ No
	•
If you answered “no,” STOP. You do not qualify for this credit.
	•
If you answered “yes,” continue to Step 2.
Step 2
1.	
First, prepare your state tax return  
(Form IT-40) through line 7.  
Enter amount from line 7 here...............................1	 ___________
2.	
Enter any Homeowner’s Residential Property  
Tax Deduction reported on Schedule 2, line 2.....2	 ___________
3.	
Modified Indiana AGI. Add lines 1 and 2,  
enter result here and continue to Step 3................3	 ___________
Step 3
If you are filing as a single individual or as married filing jointly:
	•
If the amount from Step 2, line 3 is greater than $18,599, STOP. 
You do not qualify for this credit. 
	•
If the amount from Step 2, line 3 is less than $18,000, go to 
Worksheet A to figure your credit. 
	•
If the amount from Step 2, line 3 is between $18,000 and $18,599, 
go to Worksheet B to figure your credit. 
If you are filing as a married individual filing separately:
	•
If the amount from Step 2, line 3 is greater than $9,299, STOP. 
You do not qualify for this credit. 
	•
If the amount from Step 2, line 3 is less than $9,000, go to 
Worksheet C to figure your credit. 
	•
If the amount from Step 2, line 3 is between $9,000 and $9,299, go 
to Worksheet D to figure your credit.
Worksheet A:
Complete if the answer from Step 2, line 3 is less than $18,000 and 
you are filing as single or married filing jointly.
A1	 Enter the amount of Indiana 
	
property tax you paid on your 
	
Lake County residence..................................A1	$_ ____________
A2	 Maximum credit............................................A2	$ 	
300	
A3	 Enter the smaller of A1 or A2. This is 
	
your credit. Enter here and on Schedule 5, 
	
line 7, and skip to the Final Step below.....A3	$_ ____________
Worksheet B: Indiana AGI Phaseout
Complete if the answer from Step 2, line 3 is between $18,000 and 
$18,600 and you are filing as single or married filing jointly.
B1	 Allowable maximum Indiana AGI.............. B1	$ 	
18,600	
B2	 Enter the amount from Step 2, line 3.......... B2	$_ ____________
B3	 Subtract B2 from B1 (if answer is zero 
	
or a negative amount, STOP.
	
You do not qualify for this credit)............... B3	$_ ____________
B4	 Multiply the amount on B3 by 0.5.
	
Round answer; see page 6 for
	
rounding instructions................................... B4	$_ ____________
B5	 Enter the amount of Indiana property tax
	
you paid on your Lake County residence.... B5	$_ ____________
B6	 Enter the smaller of B4 or B5. This is your
	
credit. Enter here and on Schedule 5, line 7,
	
and continue to the Final Step below.......... B6	$_ ____________
Worksheet C:
Complete if the answer from Step 2, line 3 is less than $9,000 and 
you are a married individual filing separately.
C1	 Enter the amount of Indiana 
	
property tax you paid on your 
	
Lake County residence.................................. C1	$_ ____________
C2	 Maximum credit............................................ C2	$ 	
150	
C3	 Enter the smaller of C1 or C2. This is 
	
your credit. Enter here and on Schedule 5, 
	
line 7, and skip to the Final Step below..... C3	$_ ____________
Schedule 5: Credits Continued


--- Page 32 ---

IT-40 Booklet 2024
Page 32
Worksheet D: Indiana AGI Phaseout
Complete if the answer from Step 2, line 3 is between $9,000 and 
$9,300 and you are a married individual filing separately.
D1	 Allowable maximum Indiana AGI..............D1	$ 	
9,300	
D2	 Enter the amount from Step 2, line 3..........D2	$_ ____________
D3	 Subtract D2 from D1 (if answer is zero 
	
or a negative amount, STOP.
	
You do not qualify for this credit)...............D3	$_ ____________
D4	 Multiply the amount on D3 by 0.5.
	
Round answer; see page 6 for
	
rounding instructions...................................D4	$_ ____________
D5	 Enter the amount of Indiana property tax
	
you paid on your Lake County residence....D5	$_ ____________
D6	 Enter the smaller of D4 or D5. This is your
	
credit. Enter here and on Schedule 5, line 7,
	
and continue to the Final Step below..........D6	$_ ____________
Final Step
Remember, you are not eligible to claim both the Homeowner’s 
Property Tax Deduction and the Lake County Residential Income Tax 
Credit in the same year. Therefore, if you are claiming this credit, make 
sure to remove any Homeowner’s Property Tax Deduction reported on 
Schedule 2, line 2.
Lines 8 and 9: Economic Development for a Growing 
Economy Credit (EDGE); Economic Development for 
a Growing Economy Retention Credit (EDGE-R)
If you have business income (including partnership or S corporation 
income) you may be eligible for one or both of these credits. These 
credits are available to businesses who conduct certain activities that 
are designed to foster job creation and/or job retention in Indiana.
This credit is available to owners of pass-through entities such as S 
corporations, partnerships, limited liability companies, etc. However, if all 
or part of your share of the credit is claimed by the pass-through entity, 
you may not claim the previously-claimed credit on your own behalf.
Contact the Indiana Economic Development Corporation (IEDC), 
One North Capitol, Suite 700, Indianapolis, IN, 46204, for eligibility 
requirements, or visit www.iedc.in.gov for additional information.
To claim these credits you must complete and enclose Schedule IN-
EDGE or Schedule IN-EDGE-R, which are located online at  
www.in.gov/dor/tax-forms/individual/current.
The information to be reported on Schedule IN-EDGE or Schedule 
IN-EDGE-R is located on the Indiana Schedule IN K-1 or on the 
approved credit agreement letter from the IEDC. You must include the 
completed Indiana Schedule IN K-1 with your submission.
Line 10 – Headquarters Relocation Credit (refundable 
portion)
A business with annual worldwide revenue of $50 million, at least 75 
employees (for credits awarded before July 1, 2022), and which relocates its 
corporate headquarters to Indiana may be eligible for a credit. The credit 
may be as much as 50% of the cost incurred in relocating the headquarters.
This credit must be reported on Schedule IN-OCC, found at  
www.in.gov/dor/tax-forms/individual/current. Make sure to enclose 
this schedule with your tax filing.
Some or all of this credit may be refundable. If the IEDC has ruled some 
or all of this credit to be refundable, enter on this line the refundable 
amount of the credit less the portion of the credit used to offset your tax 
liability. You must maintain the documentation provided to you that 
supports the refundable portion of this credit as DOR may request it.
Caution. The combination of the headquarters relocation credit claimed 
here (offset amount) and on lines 29 through 31 (refundable amount) may 
not exceed the total of the credit that is available. See the instructions for 
the Headquarters Relocation Credit on page 41.
For more information (including limitations on the credit and the 
application process), see Income Tax Income Tax Information Bulletin 
#97, available at www.in.gov/dor/files/ib97.pdf. This credit is administered 
by the IEDC. Contact them at One North Capitol, Suite 700, Indianapolis, 
IN 46204, via website at www.iedc.in.gov, or by phone at 317-232-8800.
Line 11 – Adoption Credit 
You are eligible to claim an adoption credit on your state tax return if 
you claimed an adoption credit on your federal tax return. The amount 
of the credit is 20% of the federal credit allowed per child, or $2,500 
per child, whichever is less. If you are claiming a credit because of a 
federal carryover of the adoption credit, the total credit allowable for 
the child is limited to $2,500.
Federal adoption carryforward credit
A carryforward credit claimed on federal Form 8839 may be allowed if it 
is from the preceding five tax years (2019, 2020, 2021, 2022 and/or 2023).
To figure the credit, use the Adoption Credit Worksheet on page 33. 
Use lines 6 through 30 if you are carrying forward a credit from a previous 
year. Complete only the lines applicable to the year(s) from which you are 
carrying forward a credit. If you are not claiming a credit based on any 
federal adoption credit carryforward, skip lines 6 through 30.
See Income Tax Information Bulletin #111 at  
www.in.gov/dor/files/ib111.pdf for more information about this credit.
Maintain with your records a copy of the federal Form 8839, federal 
Adoption Credit Carryforward Worksheets (if applicable), and federal Form 
1040 as DOR can require you to provide this information at a later date.
Line 12 – Reserved for Future Use
Schedule 5: Credits Continued


--- Page 33 ---

IT-40 Booklet 2024
Page 33
Schedule 5: Credits Continued
Adoption Credit Worksheet
Description
Child 1
Child 2
Child 3
1.	
First Name
2.	
Last Name
3.	
Year of Birth
4.	
Identification Number
5.	
Check if this child is NOT claimed as a dependent
6.	
Enter amount from 2019 Form 8839, line 11
$
$
$
7.	
Enter the amount from 2019 Form 8839, line 12
$
$
$
8.	
Divide line 6 by line 7; round answer to four decimal places
9.	
Enter the amount of 2019 carryforward credit used in 2024 (line 2 minus line 10 of the 
2024 Adoption Credit Carryforward Worksheet from the Form 8839 instructions)
$
$
$
10.	 Multiply line 8 by line 9; round to nearest whole dollar. Enter this amount on line 36
$
$
$
11.	 Enter amount from 2020 Form 8839, line 11
$
$
$
12.	 Enter the amount from 2020 Form 8839, line 12
$
$
$
13.	 Divide line 11 by line 12; round answer to four decimal places
14.	 Enter the amount of 2020 carryforward credit used in 2024 (line 3 minus line 12 of the 
2024 Adoption Credit Carryforward Worksheet from the Form 8839 instructions)
$
$
$
15.	 Multiply line 13 by line 14; round to nearest whole dollar. Enter this amount on line 37
$
$
$
16.	 Enter amount from 2021 Form 8839, line 11
$
$
$
17.	 Enter the amount from 2021 Form 8839, line 12
$
$
$
18.	 Divide line 16 by line 17; round answer to four decimal places
19.	 Enter the amount of 2021 carryforward credit used in 2024 (line 4 minus line 14 of the 
2024 Adoption Credit Carryforward Worksheet from the Form 8839 instructions)
$
$
$
20.	 Multiply line 18 by line 19; round to nearest whole dollar. Enter this amount on line 38
$
$
$
21.	 Enter amount from 2022 Form 8839, line 11
$
$
$
22.	 Enter the amount from 2022 Form 8839, line 12
$
$
$
23.	 Divide line 21 by line 22; round answer to four decimal places
24.	 Enter the amount of 2022 carryforward credit used in 2024 (line 5 minus line 16 of the 
2024 Adoption Credit Carryforward Worksheet from the Form 8839 instructions)
$
$
$
25.	 Multiply line 23 by line 24; round to nearest whole dollar. Enter this amount on line 39
$
$
$
26.	 Enter amount from 2023 Form 8839, line 11
$
$
$
27.	 Enter the amount from 2023 Form 8839, line 12
$
$
$
28.	 Divide line 26 by line 27; round answer to four decimal places
29.	 Enter the amount of 2023 carryforward credit used in 2024 (line 6 minus line 18 of the 
2024 Adoption Credit Carryforward Worksheet from the Form 8839 instructions)
$
$
$
30.	 Multiply line 28 by line 29; round to nearest whole dollar. Enter this amount on line 40
$
$
$
31.	 Enter amount from 2024 Form 8839, line 11
$
$
$
32.	 Enter the amount from 2024 Form 8839, line 12
$
$
$
33.	 Divide line 31 by line 32; round answer to four decimal places
34.	 Enter the amount from line 16 of Form 8839 reduced by the amount on line 13 of 
Form 8839. If less than zero, enter 0
$
$
$
35.	 Multiply line 33 by line 34; round to nearest whole dollar. Enter this amount on line 41
$
$
$


--- Page 34 ---

IT-40 Booklet 2024
Page 34
Schedule 5: Credits Continued
Adoption Credit Worksheet (continued)
Description
Child 1
Child 2
Child 3
36.	 Enter the amount on line 10
$
$
$
37.	 Enter the amount on line 15
$
$
$
38.	 Enter the amount on line 20
$
$
$
39.	 Enter the amount on line 25
$
$
$
40.	 Enter the amount on line 30
$
$
$
41.	 Enter the amount on line 35
$
$
$
42.	 Enter the sum of lines 36 through 41
$
$
$
43.	 Multiply line 42 by 20% (0.20)
$
$
$
44.	 Enter $2,500
$
$
$
45.	 Enter the sum of any previous Indiana adoption credits claimed for the child
$
$
$
46.	 Enter line 44 minus line 45. If less than zero, enter 0
$
$
$
47.	 Enter the lesser of line 43 and line 46. Enter this amount on IT-40, Schedule 5, line 11, 
or IT-40PNR, Schedule F, line 11
$
$
$


--- Page 35 ---

IT-40 Booklet 2024
Page 35
Schedule IN-DONATE
Each of the following funds has been assigned a three-digit code 
number. When listing your contribution on Schedule IN-DONATE 
under line 1, enter the name of the fund, the three-digit code number 
and the amount to be contributed.
You may contribute all or a portion of your Form IT-40, line 16 
overpayment to the following funds: 
	•
Indiana Nongame Wildlife Fund  200
The Indiana Wildlife Diversity Program offers you the opportunity to 
play an active role in conserving Indiana’s nongame and endangered 
wildlife. This program is funded through public donations to the 
Indiana Nongame Wildlife Fund. The money you donate goes directly 
to the protection and management of more than 750 wildlife species 
in Indiana - from songbirds and salamanders to state-endangered 
Trumpeter swans and spotted turtles.
Enter both the name of the fund and the amount you wish to donate 
under line 1, and enter 200 as the designated 3-digit code number. 
Also, see the Limitation below.
If you do not have an overpayment, but want to support the 
Wildlife Diversity Section, do not change your tax return.  
You may make a contribution online by visiting  
www.in.gov/dnr/fish-and-wildlife/nongame-and-endangered-wildlife 
and clicking “Donate to the Fund.”
	•
Military Family Relief Fund  201
The Indiana Department of Veterans Affairs’ Military Family Relief 
Fund provides emergency grants to be used by military and veteran 
families. The funds can be utilized for needs such as food, housing, 
utilities, medical services, transportation, and other essential family 
support expenses which have become difficult to afford. The Military 
Family Relief Fund has helped more than 2000 families since its 
inception in 2007.
Enter both the name of the fund and the amount you wish to donate 
under line 1, and enter 201 as the designated 3-digit code number. 
Also, see the Limitation below.
If you do not have an overpayment, but want to support the Military 
Family Relief Fund, you may make a contribution by writing a check 
made payable to the Military Family Relief Fund and send it to the 
Indiana Department of Veterans Affairs, 302 W. Washington Street, 
Suite E-120, Indianapolis, IN 46204. 
Read more about this fund and other programs available for Hoosier 
veterans online at www.in.gov/dva.
	•
Public K – 12 Education Fund  202
You may donate all or a portion of your overpayment to help fund 
public education for kindergarten through grade 12 in Indiana. Enter 
both the name of the fund and the amount you wish to donate under 
line 1, and enter 202 as the designated 3-digit code number. Also, see 
the following Limitation.
Limitation 
The combination of the amounts you wish to donate to these funds 
cannot exceed the overpayment shown on Form IT-40, line 16. 
	•
If the total of the donations designated on this schedule is more 
than your available overpayment, the donation(s) will be reduced 
on a pro rata basis. For example, Sam wants to donate $20 to 
each fund, for a total of $60. His actual overpayment is $51. The 
donations to the three funds will be evenly reduced to $17 each.
	•
If you entered a donation to one or more of these funds, and 
wish to apply some of your overpayment to next years estimated 
tax account, the overpayment will be applied first to the selected 
fund(s) and then to the estimated tax account. Any remaining 
overpayment will be refunded to you. For example, Aaron 
donated $100 to the Indiana Nongame Wildlife Fund, and is 
applying $50 to next year’s estimated tax account. His actual 
overpayment is only $110. The full $100 will be applied to the 
selected fund; the remaining $10 will be applied to next year’s 
estimated tax account.
Schedule IN-W: Indiana Withholding 
Statements
You must complete and enclose Schedule IN-W if you are reporting 
any tax withheld on your behalf and when filing your IT-40, IT-40PNR 
or IT-40RNR by paper. Enter information from each withholding 
statement, including Form W-2, 1099, IN-MSID-A or Schedule IN K-1.
If you have a withholding statement that withholds tax for multiple 
Indiana counties, enter the Indiana state income and Indiana state tax 
withheld once for that statement. Do not duplicate the Indiana state 
income and Indiana state tax withheld on multiple lines.
Column A – Social Security Number
Enter your or your spouse’s (if married filing jointly) social security 
number from your W-2, 1099, IN-MSID-A, IN K-1, or other form on 
which Indiana state and/or local tax withholding is reported for you or 
your spouse (if married filing jointly).
Column B – Form Code 
Enter the appropriate form code listed on the Reference Chart provided at 
the bottom of this schedule. Leave blank if your W-2, 1099, or other federal 
form type is not listed or if your withholding is from IN-MSID-A or IN K-1.
Column C – Employer or Payer Identification Number
Enter the employer’s or State/payer’s identification number (ID).
Column D – State Income 
Enter the amount of Indiana income.
Column E – State Tax Withheld 
Enter the amount of Indiana State Tax withheld.
Important. Complete Columns F, G, and H only if there is Indiana 
local withholding.
Column F – Local Income
Enter the amount of Indiana local income.
Schedule IN-DONATE


--- Page 36 ---

IT-40 Booklet 2024
Page 36
Column G – Local Tax Withheld 
Enter the amount of County Tax withheld.
Column H – Locality Code 
Enter the appropriate Indiana 2-digit county code. Refer to the back of 
Schedule CT-40, CT-40PNR or IT-40RNR for a list of county codes.
Line 26
Add Column E, lines 1 through 25. Enter this total on line 1 of IT-40 
Schedule 5, or line 1 of IT-40PNR Schedule F, or line 7 of IT-40RNR
Line 27
Add Column G, lines 1 through 25. Enter this total on line 2 of IT-40 
Schedule 5, or line 2 of IT-40PNR Schedule F, or line 8 of IT-40RNR.
Note. You must enclose your W-2s, 1099s, IN-MSID-As, IN K-1s, or 
other forms reporting Indiana state or county tax withholding with 
this completed schedule.
If you are reporting more than 25 withholding statements, complete 
and include additional Schedule IN-W as needed, but do not complete 
lines 26 and 27. On the first schedule, enter the total of state tax 
withheld (Column E) from all pages on line 26 and enter the total of 
local tax withheld (Column G) from all pages on line 27. Use these 
totals numbers on lines 1 and 2 of IT-40 Schedule 5 or IT-40PNR 
Schedule F, or lines 7 and 8 of IT-40RNR.
Schedule 6: Offset Credits
The following credits cannot be refunded; their purpose is to help 
reduce your state and/or county tax amounts due. See the Combined 
Limitation areas after the instructions for line 3 and line 7.
Important. If you are claiming the credit from a pass through 
entity, include a copy of Schedule IN K-1 or IT-41 Schedule IN K-1. 
In addition, if you are reporting credits required to be reported in 
Schedule IN-OCC, Part A, do not list the credit directly on Schedule 6. 
Instead, report the credit on Schedule IN-OCC, Part A and carry the 
total amount from Schedule IN-OCC, Part A to Schedule 6, Line 7. If 
you are claiming carryforward from a prior year, complete Schedule 
IN-OCC, Part B to report the carried over credit. In addition, if you 
have not claimed the full amount of current-year credits, report all 
current-year credits on Schedule IN-OCC, Part B, even if the credit 
cannot be carried over.
Line 1 – Credit for Local Taxes Paid Outside of Indiana
If you figured county tax on Form IT-40, line 9, and had to pay a local 
income tax outside Indiana, you may be able to take a credit. This 
credit applies only if the tax you paid outside Indiana was to another 
city, county, town, or other local governmental entity; and they did not 
refund the tax, or give you a credit for Indiana county tax.
The credit can be used to reduce your county tax liability. Carefully 
read instructions for Line B below.
Complete lines A, B and C to figure your credit.
A.	 Enter the amount of tax paid to the  
non-Indiana locality ...............................................A	 __________
B.	 Multiply the amount of income taxed by  
the non-Indiana locality by the rate from  
Schedule CT-40, line 2. Enter result here ............ B	 __________
C.	 Enter the amount of Indiana county  
income tax shown on Form IT-40, line 9 ............ C	 __________
The amount of the credit is the lesser of the amounts on A, B or C.
Note. See the Combined Limitation page 37.
Important. You must enclose either a copy of your W-2s or other 
withholding statements showing the non-Indiana locality amount 
withheld or a copy of the non-Indiana locality tax return.
Remember, you can use this credit only if you have both:
	•
A county tax amount on Form IT-40, line 9, and
	•
A local income tax that you had to pay outside Indiana.
Line 2 – Community Revitalization Enhancement 
District Credit
A state and local income tax liability credit is available for a qualified 
investment made within a community revitalization enhancement 
district. The expenditure must be made under a plan adopted by an 
advisory commission on industrial development and approved by the 
Indiana Economic Development Corporation before it is made. The 
credit is equal to 25% of the qualified investment made by the taxpayer 
during the taxable year.
This credit is available to owners of pass-through entities such as 
S corporations, partnerships, limited liability companies, etc. It is 
nonrefundable and cannot be carried back. You may carry forward any 
excess credit to the next tax year.
The allowable credit is the lesser of the available credit or the 
county tax due on line 9 of Form IT-40. Also, claim any unused 
amount (within certain limitations) on Schedule 6 under line 6 (see 
instructions for this credit on page 39).
Contact the Indiana Economic Development Corporation, One North 
Capitol, Suite 700, Indianapolis, IN, 46204 for additional information.
See the Restriction for Certain Tax Credits - Limited to One per 
Project below for additional limitations. Also, see the Combined 
Limitation below.
Line 3 – Other Local Credits
Currently, there are no other local credits available to be reported in 
this space.
Restriction for Certain Tax Credits – Limited to One 
per Project
A taxpayer may not be granted more than one credit for the same 
project. The credits that are subject to this limitation are the 
alternative fuel vehicle manufacturer credit, community revitalization 
enhancement district credit, enterprise zone investment cost credit, 
Schedule IN-W: Indiana Withholding Statements Continued


--- Page 37 ---

IT-40 Booklet 2024
Page 37
Hoosier business investment credit, industrial recovery credit, and the 
venture capital investment credit.
For more information see Income Tax Information Bulletin #59 
available at www.in.gov/dor/files/ib59.pdf.
Apply this restriction first when figuring your credits. Then apply the 
Combined Limitation.
Combined Limitation
There is one final limitation if you claim more than one credit on lines 
1 through 3 of Schedule 6. These credits, when combined, cannot be 
greater than the county tax shown on Form IT-40 line 9; if they are, 
adjust the amounts before you enter them. See the following Order of 
Application and example for guidance. 
Order of Application
First, use the credits which cannot be carried over and applied 
against your county tax in another year. This means apply any credit 
for local taxes paid outside Indiana first, then apply any community 
revitalization enhancement district credit.
How to Adjust the Amount of Credit to be Entered 
(Example)
Example. Megan is eligible to claim a $100 credit for local taxes paid 
outside Indiana plus a $200 Community Revitalization Enhancement 
District credit (CRED), for a $300 total amount in offset credits. Her 
county tax due (IT-40, line 9) is $160. Since her combined credits are 
more than her county tax due, she should reduce the last entry (the 
$200 CRED credit) by the $140 difference to $60. She will enter the 
full $100 credit for local taxes paid outside Indiana on Schedule 6, line 
1, and the $60 limited CRED credit on line 3a.
Note. Megan may use the $140 remaining CRED credit to offset any 
state adjusted gross income tax due on this year’s tax return (IT-40, 
line 8). See additional instructions for the CRED credit on page 39.
Line 4 – College Credit
If you donated money or property to an Indiana college or university, 
you may be able to take a credit of up to $100 on a single return or 
$200 on a joint return. To claim this credit you must complete and 
enclose Schedule CC-40. For additional information, see Schedule 
CC-40 at www.in.gov/dor/tax-forms/individual/current and Income 
Tax Information Bulletin #14 at www.in.gov/dor/files/ib14.pdf.
Important. You must maintain documentation of your contributions. 
DOR can require you to provide this information at a later date.
Note. Tuition paid to a college or university is not a contribution, and 
does not qualify for this credit.
See the Combined Limitation on page 46.
Line 5 – Credit for Taxes Paid to Other States
If you received income from another state while you were an Indiana 
resident, you must report that income on your Indiana income tax 
return. You may be able to take a credit for taxes paid to another state. 
If you had income from another state, and had to pay taxes to that 
state, read the following instructions carefully.
If you were an Indiana resident during the tax year and had income 
from any of the states listed in Group A below, you should first find out 
what the other state’s rules are concerning the taxation of your income.
Group A
No Agreement (Credit taken on resident return)
Alabama
Louisiana
New York
Arkansas
Maine
North Carolina
California
Maryland
North Dakota
Colorado
Massachusetts
Oklahoma
Connecticut
Minnesota
Rhode Island
Delaware
Mississippi
South Carolina
Georgia
Missouri
Utah
Hawaii
Montana
Vermont
Idaho
Nebraska
Virginia
Illinois
New Hampshire*
Washington**
Iowa
New Jersey
West Virginia
Kansas
New Mexico
Any foreign countries or U.S. possessions
* Capital gain, interest, and dividends only.
** Capital gains only.
If you are personally subject to the District of Columbia Unincorporated 
Business Franchise Tax (D-30) on income that you received while you 
are an Indiana resident, you may claim a credit against your Indiana 
adjusted gross income tax for those taxes. Do not claim a credit for taxes 
paid to the District of Columbia from Form D-40.
Note. If:
	•
You are an owner or beneficiary of a partnership, S corporation, 
estate, trust, or similar pass-through entity; 
	•
The entity is subject to another state’s pass through entity tax 
enacted after 2017; and 
	•
The pass through entity tax is substantially similar to Indiana’s 
PTET; 
you are eligible to claim a credit for that other state’s pass through 
entity tax as if you paid the tax directly. In addition, if you have 
composite or withholding taxes paid by a pass through entity on your 
behalf, you are eligible for credit for those taxes as well. 
Group A Worksheet
A.	 Enter the amount of tax paid to the other  
state. (This does not mean the tax withheld  
from your wages, but the actual tax figured 
on the other state’s return)...................................... A	 __________
B.	 Multiply the amount of income from the  
other state (that is subject to Indiana tax)  
by 3.05% (.0305).......................................................B	 __________
C.	 Enter the amount of Indiana state income  
tax shown on Form IT-40 line 8 ........................... C	 __________
The lesser of the amounts on A, B or C is your allowable credit for 
taxes paid to other states. 
Schedule 6: Offset Credits Continued


--- Page 38 ---

IT-40 Booklet 2024
Page 38
If you filed an income tax return with another state, you must provide 
a copy of that state’s income tax return. See Income Tax Information 
Bulletin #28 at www.in.gov/dor/files/ib28.pdf for a list of acceptable 
documentation when a return is not filed with another state. 
Example. Ryan reported $10,000 Illinois-source wage income on the 
Illinois nonresident individual income tax return, and paid $300 tax 
to Illinois on that income. His Indiana state tax liability from line 8 of 
Form IT-40 is $870.
He will enter the following information on the Group A Worksheet.
A.	 $300 (tax paid to Illinois)
B.	 $305 ($10,000 x .0305, tax due to Indiana)
C.	 $870 (Form IT-40 line 8)
Ryan’s credit is $300, which is the lesser of A, B and C.
Example. Sarah owns an interest in a partnership. Her share of the 
partnership’s income is $100,000 and her share of the partnership’s 
bonus depreciation is $10,000. The partnership derived 40% of its 
income from Illinois sources, and Sarah paid $2,000 of state income 
tax to Illinois. Her Indiana state tax liability is $5,000.
She will enter the following:
A.	 $2,000 (tax paid to Illinois)
B.	 $1,342 (($100,000 income +$10,000 bonus depreciation) 
multiplied by .4 (share of partnership income from Illinois sources) 
multiplied by .0305 (tax due to Indiana))
C.	 $5,000 (Form IT-40 line 8)
Sarah’s credit is $1,342, the lesser of A, B, and C.
Exception 1 – Gambling winnings from other states. If you’re not 
required to file another state’s income tax return to report gambling 
winnings from that state, enclose the W-2G issued for that state. Use 
the amount of state tax withheld by that state on Line A of the Group 
A Worksheet.
Exception 2. If you are subject to state income tax on income from a 
non-United States country or territory that is not currently subject to 
tax in that country but will be, enclose the following information with 
your return:
	•
The country or territory in which the income is subject to tax
	•
The type of income (dividends, interest, etc.)
	•
The amount of income
	•
The reason the income is deferred by the country
	•
The tax that will be due upon the income upon recognition by the 
foreign country
	•
The credit for taxes paid to another state claimed on the income 
(include a computation similar to the Group A worksheet above).
Group B
Reciprocal Agreement (Wages, Salaries, Tips, and Commissions Only)
Kentucky
Ohio
Wisconsin
Michigan
Pennsylvania
If you were an Indiana resident during the tax year and had income 
from one of the states listed in Group B, you are covered by a 
reciprocal agreement. However, this agreement only applies to income 
from wages, salaries, tips and commissions. If you had other types of 
income from these states (such as business income, farm income, etc.), 
use the Group A Worksheet to figure your credit.
Normally, employers in these states will withhold Indiana state tax 
from your wages because of the reciprocal agreement. However, if the 
state tax they withheld is not for Indiana, you must file a claim for 
refund with that state. You still have to include this income on your 
Indiana return and pay the Indiana tax. You’ll get some or all of the 
other state’s taxes back by filing a refund claim with them.
Note. Winnings from Indiana riverboats and lotteries are not eligible 
for the reciprocal agreement.
Caution. You may have to make estimated tax payments to Indiana. If 
the reciprocal state employer does not withhold Indiana withholding 
on your wage income, or does not withhold enough, see page 9 for 
information on how to figure and pay estimated tax.
If you were a full-year resident of one of the reciprocal states and your 
income from Indiana was from wages, salaries, tips and commissions, 
you should file Form IT-40RNR, Reciprocal Nonresident Income 
Tax Return. If you were a resident of one of the reciprocal states and 
had other types of income from Indiana, or were a part-year Indiana 
resident, you will need to file Form IT-40PNR. 
Group C
Reverse Credit (Credit taken on nonresident return)
Arizona
Oregon
Washington D.C.
If you were an Indiana resident during the tax year and had income 
from one of the states in Group C, you must pay Indiana tax on all 
your income. You will also need to file a nonresident return with the 
other state and claim a credit on their tax return for the Indiana tax 
paid. For Indiana residents who are subject personally to the District 
of Columbia Unincorporated Business Franchise Tax (D-30) on 
income that you received, please see the Group A instructions.
Group D
No State Income Tax (No credit allowed)
Alaska
South Dakota
Texas
Florida
Tennessee
Wyoming
Nevada
If you were an Indiana resident during the tax year and had income 
from one of the states in Group D, you are not allowed to claim 
this credit. These states do not have an income tax. You must file an 
Indiana resident return and pay Indiana tax on all your income.
See the Combined Limitation on page 46.
Line 6 – Other Credits
Each of the following credits has been assigned a three-digit code 
number. When claiming the credit on Schedule 6 under line 6, enter the 
name of the credit, the three-digit code number and the amount claimed.
Schedule 6: Offset Credits Continued


--- Page 39 ---

IT-40 Booklet 2024
Page 39
ABLE 529A Account Credit  872
You may be eligible for a credit for contributions made to InvestABLE 
Indiana plan. While there are many 529 college savings plans available 
both in Indiana and nation-wide, only contributions made to this 
specific Indiana plan are eligible for this credit. You may make a 
contribution before the regular due date of your 2024 tax return (April 
15, 2025) and claim the credit for the contribution. However, if you 
claim a credit in 2024 for a 2025 contribution, you cannot claim a 
credit for that contribution on your 2025 return. 
This plan is administered through the Indiana ABLE Authority. More 
information can be obtained online at savewithable.com/in/home.html. 
See Schedule IN-ABLE at www.in.gov/dor/tax-forms/individual/current 
to figure your credit. This schedule must be enclosed when claiming 
the credit. Enter code 872 under line 6 if claiming this credit. See the 
Combined Limitation on page 46.
Airport Development Zone Credits
The following credits have been repealed:
Airport Development Zone Employment Expense Credit  800
Airport Development Zone Investment Cost Credit  801
Airport Development Zone Loan Interest Credit  802
However, any previously approved yet unused credit is available to be 
claimed. 
Enter the appropriate 3-digit code under line 6 if claiming any of these 
credits. See the Combined Limitation on page 46.
Alternative Fuel Vehicle Manufacturer Credit  845
This credit has been repealed. However, any previously approved yet 
unused credit is available to be claimed. Enter code 845 under line 6 if 
claiming this credit. 
See the Restriction for Certain Tax Credits – Limited to One per 
Project and the Combined Limitation on page 46 for additional 
limitations.
Attainable Homeownership Tax Credit  875
A credit is available for contributions of cash and other property 
made to Habitat for Humanity of Indiana. The credit is for 50% of any 
allowable contributions up to a maximum credit of $10,000 per taxable 
year. In addition, the total amount of credits per state fiscal year is 
limited to $4,000,000.
Note. Certification for this credit must be obtained from Habitat for 
Humanity of Indiana. Contact Habitat for Humanity at  
taxcredit@habitatindiana.org or at Habitat for Humanity of Indiana, 
Inc., 101 W. Ohio St, Suite 2000, Indianapolis, IN 46204.
The approved credit must be reported on Schedule IN-OCC, found at  
www.in.gov/dor/tax-forms/corporate/current-corporatepartnership.  
Make sure to enclose this schedule with your tax filing.
Benefit Corporation Employment of Individuals with 
Disability Tax Credit  881
A credit is available for employers that hire individuals referred to the 
employer for employment through a vocational rehabilitation services 
program for individuals with a disability. If all the following criteria 
are met, you are eligible for the credit:
	•
You are a benefit corporation as defined in IC 23-1.3-2-3
	•
You are an employer that did not have more than 50 employees at 
any time during the taxable year; 
	•
You hire an individual referred to the employer for employment 
through a vocational rehabilitation services program for 
individuals with a disability (the “credit-eligible employee”);
	•
The credit-eligible employee was first hired by the employer after 
Dec. 31, 2023; 
	•
The credit-eligible employee works at least an average of 20 hours 
per week for the employer and at a similar compensation rate as 
other employees performing the same or similar tasks; and 
	•
The credit-eligible employee is not hired to replace an employee 
who was terminated unless the terminated employee was 
terminated for misconduct, or the terminated employee 
voluntarily left their position.   
The credit is equal to 30% of the credit-eligible employee’s wages 
for the first year for which the credit-eligible employee’s wages are 
allowable for purposes of the credit. The credit increases to 40% of 
wages for the second year and 50% for the third and subsequent years.
The credit is only available if you are a shareholder in an S corporation. 
This credit will be reported to you on Schedule IN K-1.
Community Revitalization Enhancement District 
Credit  808
See the Schedule 6 line 3 instructions for details about this credit. This 
credit is available to offset both your state and local tax liabilities, and 
any unused remainder is available to be carried forward. Owners of 
pass-through entities are eligible for this credit.
If you did not use all of the available community revitalization 
enhancement district credit on Schedule 6, line 3, the remaining credit 
should be claimed on this line.
For more information, contact the Indiana Economic Development 
Corporation, One North Capitol, Suite 700, Indianapolis, IN, 46204, 
or visit their website at www.iedc.in.gov.
Note. See the Restriction for Certain Tax Credits - Limited to 
One per Project and the Combined Limitation on page 46 for 
additional limitations.
Enter code 808 under line 6 if claiming this credit.
Economic Development for a Growing Economy – 
Nonresident Employees (EDGE-NR)  865
This credit is for incremental state income tax amounts that would 
have been withheld on employees from reciprocal states if those 
employees had been subject to Indiana state tax withholding. Owners 
of pass-through entities such as S corporations, partnerships, limited 
liability companies, etc., are eligible for this credit. Unlike the EDGE 
and EDGE-R credits, the EDGE-NR credit is a non-refundable credit.
Schedule 6: Offset Credits Continued


--- Page 40 ---

IT-40 Booklet 2024
Page 40
This credit is administered by the IEDC. Contact them at One North 
Capitol, Suite 700, Indianapolis, IN 46204, via website at  
www.iedc.in.gov, or by phone at 317-232-8800.
The approved credit must be reported on Schedule IN-OCC, found at 
www.in.gov/dor/tax-forms/individual/current. Make sure to enclose 
this schedule with your tax filing. If you are claiming this credit as an 
owner of a pass-through entity such as S corporations, partnerships, 
limited liability companies, etc., make sure to keep Schedule IN K-1 
with your records as DOR can require you to provide this information.
Employer Child Care Expenditure Credit  876
A credit is available for employers with 100 or fewer employees who 
incur certain costs for establishing new Indiana licensed childcare 
facilities for their employees’ children. The credit is 50% of the 
employer’s qualified expenditures for Indiana licensed childcare 
facilities, up to a maximum credit of $100,000 per employer. The 
amount of allowable credits is $2,500,000 per state fiscal year and is 
awarded in the order of returns claiming the credit. 
Qualified expenditures for purposes of this credit are limited to 
expenses:
	•
For the acquisition, construction, rehabilitation, or expansion of 
property used as part of an Indiana qualified childcare facility of a 
taxpayer that is operated for the taxpayer’s employees; 
	•
Incurred under a contract between a taxpayer and an Indiana 
qualified childcare facility to provide for the acquisition, 
construction, rehabilitation, or expansion of property used as part 
of the Indiana qualified childcare facility; or 
	•
For purposes of complying with the qualified child care facility 
licensure requirements under IC 12-17.2, as part of the taxpayer 
acquiring or constructing an Indiana qualified child care facility. 
This credit is not available for employers who were in the business of 
operating a childcare facility prior to making qualified expenditures 
allowable for this credit. 
If you take this credit, the credit may be recaptured if certain events 
occur within five years after the credit was allowed. These events are:
	•
Cessation of the operation of the Indiana qualified childcare 
facility as an Indiana qualified childcare facility; 
	•
A change in ownership of an Indiana qualified childcare facility 
for which a credit was allowed under this chapter, unless the 
person acquiring an interest agrees to assume the recapture 
liability of the person disposing of an interest; or 
	•
The use of an Indiana qualified childcare facility for the 
enrollment of a child from any individual who is not an employee 
of the taxpayer.
However, cessation or changes in ownership as a result of accident 
or casualty are not subject to credit recapture.  The credit recapture 
is 100% of the credit if the event occurs in the year after the credit is 
allowed. The recapture percentage is reduced by 20% each year for 
the next four years, and any event occurring in the sixth year after the 
credit is first allowed is not subject to recapture.
Employment of Individuals with Disability Tax 
Credit  877
A credit is available for employers that hire individuals referred to the 
employer for employment through a vocational rehabilitation services 
program for individuals with a disability. If all the following criteria 
are met, you are eligible for the credit: 
	•
You are an employer that did not have more than 500 employees 
at any time during the taxable year; 
	•
You hire an individual referred to the employer for employment 
through a vocational rehabilitation services program for 
individuals with a disability (the “credit-eligible employee”); 
	•
The credit-eligible employee was first hired by the employer after 
Dec. 31, 2023; 
	•
The credit-eligible employee works at least an average of 20 hours 
per week for the employer and at a similar compensation rate as 
other employees performing the same or similar tasks; and 
	•
The credit-eligible employee is not hired to replace an employee 
who was terminated unless the terminated employee was 
terminated for misconduct or the terminated employee 
voluntarily left their position.
If you are receiving the credit as a result of an interest in a partnership, 
the eligibility is determined at the partnership level. 
The credit is equal to 20% of the credit-eligible employee’s wages 
for the first year for which the credit-eligible employee’s wages are 
allowable for purposes of the credit. The credit increases to 30% of 
wages for the second year and 40% for the third and subsequent years. 
If you claim this credit as a result of your own activities as opposed 
to those reported on a Schedule IN K-1 or IT-41 Schedule IN K-1, 
DOR may contact you to complete Form EDTC W-1, Employment 
of Individuals with Disability Tax Credit Worksheet, to provide 
additional information related to the credit. Additional instructions 
will be provided upon issuance of the Form EDTC W-1.
You may also receive a Notice of Proposed Assessment if you are 
claiming this as a sole proprietor or disregarded entity. If this happens, 
please submit the requested EDTC W-1. If the Notice of Proposed 
Assessment has not been resolved within 60 days of the date the 
Notice of Proposed Assessment was issued, you can file a protest with 
DOR’s Legal Division. Failure to file a timely protest may result in 
collection actions.
Note. If you are a benefit corporation (as defined in IC 23-1.3-23)  
and did not have more than 50 employees at any time during the 
taxable year, see the instructions for Benefit Corporation Employment 
of Individuals with Disability Tax Credit, Code 881, on page 39.
About Enterprise Zone Credits 
Certain areas within Indiana have been designated as enterprise 
zones. Enterprise zones are established to encourage investment and 
job growth in distressed urban areas. Visit www.aiez.org to look up 
contact information for a particular enterprise zone.
Sole proprietors who operate and/or invest in a business located in 
a zone and owners of pass-through entities such as S corporations, 
partnerships, limited liability companies, etc., are eligible to claim 
the enterprise zone employment expense credit and/or the enterprise 
Schedule 6: Offset Credits Continued


--- Page 41 ---

IT-40 Booklet 2024
Page 41
zone loan interest credit. Contact the Indiana Economic Development 
Corporation, One North Capitol, Suite 700, Indianapolis, IN, 46204, 
or visit their website at www.iedc.in.gov for more information about 
these credits.
Enterprise Zone Employment Expense Credit  812
This credit is based on qualified investments made within Indiana. 
It is the lesser of 10% of qualifying wages, or $1,500 per qualified 
employee, up to the amount of tax liability on income derived from 
the enterprise zone.
For more information see Income Tax Information Bulletin #66 at 
www.in.gov/dor/files/ib66.pdf and Indiana Schedule EZ, Parts 1, 2 and 
3 at www.in.gov/dor/tax-forms/enterprise-zone-forms. Also, you may 
contact the Indiana Economic Development Corporation, One North 
Capitol, Suite 700, Indianapolis, IN, 46204, call 317-232-8827, or visit 
their website at www.iedc.in.gov.
Note. Schedule EZ must be enclosed if claiming this credit.
Enter code 812 under line 6 if claiming this credit. Also, see the 
Combined Limitation on page 46.
Enterprise Zone Investment Cost Credit  813
This credit is based on qualified investments made within Indiana. 
It can be up to a maximum of 30% of the investment, depending on 
the number of employees, the type of business and the amount of 
investment in an enterprise zone.
For more information about this credit, see Income Tax Information 
Bulletin #66 at www.in.gov/dor/files/ib66.pdf, contact the Indiana 
Economic Development Corporation, One North Capitol, Suite 700, 
Indianapolis, IN, 46204, or visit their website at www.iedc.in.gov.
Note. See the Restriction for Certain Tax Credits - Limited to 
One per Project and the Combined Limitation on page 46 for 
additional limitations.
Enter code 813 under line 6 if claiming this credit.
Enterprise Zone Loan Interest Credit  814
This credit can be for up to 5% of the interest received from all 
qualified loans made before Jan. 1, 2018, for use in an Indiana 
enterprise zone.
For more information, and how to calculate this credit, see Income Tax 
Information Bulletin #66 at www.in.gov/dor/files/ib66.pdf and Indiana 
Schedule LIC at www.in.gov/dor/tax-forms/enterprise-zone-forms. 
Note. Schedule LIC must be enclosed if claiming this credit. Contact 
the Indiana Economic Development Corporation, One North Capitol, 
Suite 700, Indianapolis, IN, 46204, call 317-232-8827, or visit their 
website at www.iedc.in.gov for additional information.
Enter code 814 under line 6 if claiming this credit. Also, see the 
Combined Limitation on page 46.
Ethanol Production Credit  815
This credit has been repealed. However, any previously approved yet 
unused credit is available to be claimed. 
Enter code 815 under line 6 if claiming this credit. See the Combined 
Limitation on page 46 for additional limitations.
Film and Media Production Tax Credit  869
Effective July 1, 2022, a credit is available for expenses incurred for 
qualified film and media production expenses. The amount of the 
taxpayer’s credit is equal to the taxpayer’s qualified film and media 
production expenses multiplied by a percentage determined by the 
Indiana Economic Development Corporation, but not more than 30% 
of the expenses.
Note. Certification for this credit must be obtained from the Indiana 
Economic Development Corporation. See  
iedc.in.gov/indiana-advantages/investments/film-and-media-tax-credit  
for further information.
This credit must be reported on Schedule IN-OCC, found at  
www.in.gov/dor/tax-forms/individual/current. Make sure to  
enclose this schedule with your tax filing.
Enclose the certification letter from the IEDC with the return, 
otherwise the credit will be denied.
Foster Care Donations Credit  867
A credit for donations to qualifying foster care organizations is available. 
In addition, beginning July 1, 2023, a credit for qualifying contributions 
to the Insuring Foster Youth Trust Fund is also available. The credit is 
50% of the donation made, up to a maximum of $10,000 per taxable year. 
In addition, no more than $2,000,000 in credits can be awarded during a 
calendar year. See www.in.gov/dor/tax-forms/other-forms/foster-credit 
for further information regarding the application and approval process.
This credit must be reported on Schedule IN-OCC, found at  
www.in.gov/dor/tax-forms/individual/current. Make sure to  
enclose this schedule with your tax filing.
Enclose the approval letter from the Department of Revenue with the 
return, otherwise the credit will be denied.
Headquarters Relocation Credit  818
Some or all of this credit may be available to be refunded. See below 
for more information.
A business may be eligible for a credit if it meets one of two sets of 
criteria. The first set of criteria (“first test”) is that the business meets 
all of the following:
	•
Has an annual worldwide revenue of $50 million;
	•
Has at least 75 Indiana employees (for credits awarded before July 
1, 2022); and
	•
Relocates its corporate headquarters to Indiana.
The second set of criteria (“second test”) is that the business meets 
either (1) or (2), meets (3), and meets (4) or (5):
1.	
Received at least $4 million in venture capital in the six months 
immediately preceding the business’s application for this tax credit. 
Schedule 6: Offset Credits Continued


--- Page 42 ---

IT-40 Booklet 2024
Page 42
2.	
Closes on at least $4,000,000 in venture capital not more than 
six months after submitting the business’s application for this tax 
credit.
3.	
Has at least 10 Indiana employees (for credits awarded before July 
1, 2022).
4.	
Relocates its corporate headquarters to Indiana.
5.	
Relocates the number of jobs equal to 80% of the business’s total 
payroll during the immediately preceding quarter to an Indiana 
location.
The credit may be as much as 50% of the cost incurred in relocating 
the taxpayer’s headquarters. For more information (including 
limitations on the credit and the application process), see Income Tax 
Information Bulletin #97, available at www.in.gov/dor/files/ib97.pdf. 
This credit is administered by the IEDC. Contact them at One North 
Capitol, Suite 700, Indianapolis, IN 46204, via website at  
www.iedc.in.gov, or by phone at 317-232-8800.
This credit must be reported on Schedule IN-OCC, found at  
www.in.gov/dor/tax-forms/individual/current. Make sure to  
enclose this schedule with your tax filing.
Submit a copy of the certificate from the IEDC verifying the amount 
of tax credit for the taxable year with the return. Otherwise, the credit 
will be denied.
Enclose proof of the relocation costs as well as proof of employment 
of the minimum number of employees in Indiana and, if applicable, 
payroll in both Indiana and everywhere. See the Combined 
Limitation on page 46 for additional limitations.
Important. If the IEDC has granted a refundable credit under the 
second test, see the instructions on page 32 for completing Schedule 
5, line 10. Maintain the documentation provided to you that supports 
the refundable portion of this credit as DOR may request it.
Health Reimbursement Arrangement Credit  878
A credit is available for employers that make contributions to health 
reimbursement arrangements for their employer. The credit is 
available for the first two years that the employer: 
	•
Provides an amount toward the health reimbursement 
arrangement is equal to or greater than either the level of benefits 
provided in the previous benefit year; or
	•
If the amount the employer contributes toward the health 
reimbursement arrangement equals the same amount contributed 
per covered individual toward the employer provided health 
insurance plan during the previous benefit year. 
To qualify for this credit, an employer must not have more than 49 
employees at any time during the taxable year. The credit for the 
employer is equal to the lesser of:
	•
The amount contributed to the health reimbursement 
arrangement during the taxable year, or 
	•
$400 for the first year the employer qualifies for the credit, $200 
for the second year the employer qualifies for the credit, and $0 
for the third and subsequent years.
These limitations are computed on an employee-by-employee basis.
In addition, the credit is capped at $10,000,000 per fiscal year for all 
taxpayers and is awarded in the order of returns claiming the credit. 
The approved credit must be reported on Schedule IN-OCC, found at  
www.in.gov/dor/tax-forms/corporate/current-corporatepartnership.  
However, you will not have a certification/project number for this 
credit. If you are required to enter a certification number, enter a 
numeric value. Make sure to enclose this schedule with your tax filing.
Note. This credit cannot be passed through and cannot be used to 
reduce or eliminate nonresident withholding tax due.
Historic Building Rehabilitation Credit  819
This credit has been repealed. However, any previously approved yet 
unused credit is available to be claimed. 
Enter code 819 under line 6 if claiming this credit. See the Combined 
Limitation on page 46 for additional limitations.
Important. The credit will need to be recaptured if, within five years 
of the completion of the project:
	•
Ownership of the property, and/or 
	•
Additional modifications are undertaken to the property that do 
not meet required standards.
Report any recapture on the Credit Recapture Schedule IN-CR, and 
Schedule 4, line 3, Recapture of certain Indiana offset credits. See 
instructions on page 29 for more information.
Historic Rehabilitation Tax Credit  879
A credit is available for certain expenses for rehabilitation of qualified 
historic structures. A qualified historic structure is a building that is:
	•
A certified historic structure as defined in IRC section 47(c)(3);
	•
Individually listed on the register of Indiana historic sites and 
historic structures; or
	•
Located in, and contributes to, a district listed in the register of 
Indiana historic sites and historic structures.
If you:
	•
Incurred costs and expenses for the restoration and preservation 
of a qualified historic structure;
	•
The costs and expenses are defined as a qualified rehabilitation 
expenditure in IRC Section 47(c)(2); and
	•
The costs and expenses are at least $5,000 
you are eligible for a credit of 25% of the qualified rehabilitation 
expenses.  
In the case of a qualified rehabilitation expenditures incurred for 
non-income producing property, the credit is 30% of the qualified 
rehabilitation expenses. 
The credit is available for the year in which the restoration and 
preservation of the qualified historic structures. See  
www.irs.gov/pub/irs-sbse/qualified-rehabilitation-expenditures.pdf  
for further information on expenses that do and do not qualify as a 
qualified rehabilitation expenditure.
Schedule 6: Offset Credits Continued


--- Page 43 ---

IT-40 Booklet 2024
Page 43
This credit is administered by the IEDC. Contact them at One North 
Capitol, Suite 700, Indianapolis, IN 46204, via website at  
www.in.gov/dor, or by phone at 317-232-8800.
The approved credit must be reported on Schedule IN-OCC, found at 
www.in.gov/dor/tax-forms/individual/current. Make sure to enclose 
this schedule with your tax filing.
Hoosier Business Investment Credit  820
This credit is for qualified investments, which include the purchase 
of new telecommunications, production, manufacturing, fabrication, 
processing, refining or finishing equipment. Owners of pass-through 
entities such as S corporations, partnerships, limited liability 
companies, etc., are eligible for this credit.
This credit is administered by the Indiana Economic Development 
Corporation (IEDC), One North Capitol, Suite 700, Indianapolis, IN, 
46204. Visit the IEDC website at www.iedc.in.gov or call 317-232-8800 
for additional information.
Also, see Income Tax Information Bulletin #95 at  
www.in.gov/dor/files/ib95.pdf.
Note. See the Restriction for Certain Tax Credits - Limited to 
One Per Project and the Combined Limitation on page 46 for 
additional limitations.
The approved credit must be reported on Schedule IN-OCC, found at 
www.in.gov/dor/tax-forms/individual/current. Make sure to enclose 
this schedule with your tax filing. If you are claiming this credit as an 
owner of a pass-through entity such as S corporation, partnership, 
limited liability company, etc., make sure to keep Schedule IN K-1 
with your records as DOR can require you to provide this information.
Hoosier Business Investment Credit – Logistics  860
This credit is for qualified expenditures for certain logistics investments. 
Owners of pass-through entities are eligible for this credit.
This credit is administered by the Indiana Economic Development 
Corporation (IEDC), One North Capitol, Suite 700, Indianapolis, IN, 
46204. Visit the IEDC website at www.iedc.in.gov or call 317-234-
4046, and get Income Tax Information Bulletin #95 at  
www.in.gov/dor/files/ib95.pdf for additional information.
Note. See the Restriction for Certain Tax Credits - Limited to 
One Per Project and the Combined Limitation on page 46 for 
additional limitations.
The approved credit must be reported on Schedule IN-OCC, found at 
www.in.gov/dor/tax-forms/individual/current. Make sure to enclose 
this schedule with your tax filing. If you are claiming this credit as an 
owner of a pass-through entity such as S corporations, partnerships, 
limited liability companies, etc., make sure to keep Schedule IN K-1 
with your records as DOR can require you to provide this information.
Indiana529 Education Savings Plan Credit  837
You may be eligible for a credit for contributions made to Indiana529 
education savings plan. Also, you may make contributions to this 
fund for Indiana K-12 education purposes. While there are many 529 
college savings plans available both in Indiana and nation-wide, only 
contributions made to this specific Indiana529 Education Savings Plan 
are eligible for this credit.
For 2024 and later, you may make a contribution before the regular 
due date of your 2024 tax return (April 15, 2025) and claim the credit 
for the contribution. However, if you claim a credit in 2024 for a 2025 
contribution, you cannot claim a credit for that contribution on your 
2025 return.
For more information about this credit, see Income Tax Information 
Bulletin #98 at www.in.gov/dor/files/ib98.pdf. This plan is 
administered through the Indiana Education Savings Authority. More 
information can be obtained online at www.in.gov/tos/iesa and at 
www.indiana529direct.com. See Schedule IN-529 at  
www.in.gov/dor/tax-forms/individual/current to figure your credit. 
This schedule must be enclosed when claiming the credit. 
Enter code 837 under line 6 if claiming this credit. See the Combined 
Limitation on page 46. 
Indiana’s Research Expense Credit  822
Indiana has a research expense credit that is similar to the federal 
credit for research and experimental expenses paid in carrying on 
your trade or business in Indiana. Owners of pass-through entities 
such as S corporations, partnerships, limited liability companies, 
etc., are eligible to claim this credit. Enclose your Schedule IN K-1 to 
support your claim.
If you are claiming the credit as a sole proprietor or as an owner of a 
disregarded entity such as a single-member LLC, a completed Form 
IT-20REC must be kept with your records as DOR can require you to 
provide this information. Also complete Schedule IN-OCC, Part B, 
with the information for this credit. Get Form IT-20REC at  
www.in.gov/dor/tax-forms/corporate/current-corporatepartnership.
Enter code 822 under line 6 if claiming this credit. Also, see the 
Combined Limitation on page 46.
Individual Development Account Credit  823
A credit is available for qualified contributions made to a community 
development corporation participating in an Individual Development 
Account (IDA) program. Owners of pass-through entities such as S 
corporations, partnerships, limited liability companies, etc. may are 
eligible to claim this credit.
The organization must have an approved program number from the 
Indiana Housing and Community Development Authority (IHCDA) 
before a contribution qualifies for pre-approval. Applications for the 
credit are filed through the IHCDA.
S corporations and partnerships may take this credit and pass through 
the unused portion to their shareholders and partners.
Schedule 6: Offset Credits Continued


--- Page 44 ---

IT-40 Booklet 2024
Page 44
To request additional information about the definitions, procedures 
and qualifications for obtaining this credit, contact: Indiana Housing 
and Community Development Authority, 30 S. Meridian St., Suite 
1000, Indianapolis, IN 46204, telephone number 317-232-7777. 
Keep the approval certification from IEDC or letter of assignment with 
your records as DOR can require you to provide this information. 
Enter code 823 under line 6 if claiming this credit. Also, see the 
Combined Limitation on page 46.
Industrial Recovery Credit  824
This credit is based on a taxpayer’s qualified investment in a vacant 
industrial facility located in a designated industrial recovery site. If the 
Indiana Economic Development Corporation approves the application 
and the plan for rehabilitation, you are entitled to a credit based on the 
“qualified investment.” The minimum age for a facility to be eligible 
for this credit has been reduced from 20 years to 15 years. This credit 
is available to owners of pass-through entities such as S corporations, 
partnerships, limited liability companies, etc.
Note. Except for in situations described in the next sentence, a 
taxpayer is entitled to receive this credit only for a qualified investment 
made before Jan. 1, 2020. A taxpayer is entitled to receive a credit for a 
qualified investment made after Dec. 31, 2019, and before Jan. 1, 2030, 
if the taxpayer is awarded a credit under: 
	•
An application approved by the Indiana Economic Development 
Corporation (IEDC) before Jan. 1, 2020; or 
	•
An agreement entered into by the taxpayer and IEDC before Jan. 
1, 2021.
Important. Any unused credit existing before Jan. 1, 2020, is still 
eligible for carryforward for an unlimited number of years.
For additional information regarding procedures for obtaining this 
credit, contact the Indiana Economic Development Corporation, One 
North Capitol, Suite 700, Indianapolis, IN 46204, call 317-232-8800, or 
visit their website at www.iedc.in.gov.
Note. See the Restriction for Certain Tax Credits - Limited to 
One per Project and the Combined Limitation on page 46 for 
additional limitations. Enter code 824 under line 6 if claiming this 
credit. 
Military Base Investment Cost Credit  826
This credit has been repealed. However, any previously approved yet 
unused credit is available to be claimed. You must enclose approval 
certification from IEDC or a letter of assignment with your return.
Enter code 826 under line 6 if claiming this credit. See the Combined 
Limitation on page 46 for additional limitations.
Military Base Recovery Credit  827
This credit has been repealed. However, any previously approved yet 
unused credit is available to be claimed. You must enclose approval 
certification from IEDC or a letter of assignment with your return.
Enter code 827 under line 6 if claiming this credit. See the Combined 
Limitation on page 46 for additional limitations.
Mine Reclamation Credit  874
A credit is available for a qualified investment at a mine reclamation 
site. 
To be eligible for the credit, the credit must be approved by the IEDC. 
The credit for a taxable year cannot exceed 30% of the IEDC-approved 
qualified investment for the taxable year or $5,000,000, whichever is less.
The taxpayer claiming this credit must provide a copy of the IEDC 
certification of the credit. However, if a taxpayer is claiming the 
credit as an owner of a pass through entity, the taxpayer must have a 
Schedule IN K-1 reporting the claimed credit. The pass through entity 
must provide and retain the certification by IEDC.
The taxpayer can assign the credit to a lessee who remains subject 
to the same requirements. The assignment must be in writing. Also, 
any consideration may not exceed the value of the part of the credit 
assigned. Both parties must report the assignment on the state tax 
returns for the year of assignment.
Neighborhood Assistance Credit  828
If you made a contribution or engaged in activities to upgrade areas 
in Indiana, you may be able to claim a credit for this assistance. 
Contact the Indiana Housing & Community Development Authority, 
Neighborhood Assistance Program, 30 S. Meridian, Suite 1000, 
Indianapolis, IN 46204, telephone number 317-232-7777 (800-872-
0371 outside Indianapolis), for more information. 
Owners of pass-through entities such as S corporations, partnerships, 
limited liability companies, etc., are eligible for this credit.
Important. Do not report fees paid to your neighborhood association 
on this line. They are not eligible for this credit.
Enter code 828 under line 6 if claiming this credit. Also, see the 
Combined Limitation on page 46.
New Employer Credit  850
This credit has been repealed. However, any previously approved yet 
unused credit is available to be claimed. 
Enter code 850 under line 6 if claiming this credit. See the Combined 
Limitation on page 46 for additional limitations.
Physician Practice Ownership Credit  880
If you:
	•
Are a physician practicing as a primary care physician;
	•
Have an ownership interest in a corporation, limited liability 
company, partnership, or other legal entity organized to provide 
primary health care services as a physician owned entity;
	•
Are not employed by a health system (as defined in IC 16-18-2-
168.5); and
	•
Have any state income tax liability;
you may be eligible for a credit of $20,000 against your state income 
tax liability. In addition, you are permitted a $20,000 credit for the two 
years following establishment of the practice.
Schedule 6: Offset Credits Continued


--- Page 45 ---

IT-40 Booklet 2024
Page 45
To qualify for this credit, the physician’s practice must:
	•
Be established as a legal entity under Indiana law after Dec. 31, 
2023;
	•
Open and begin to provide primary health care services to 
patients in a particular taxable year beginning after Dec. 31, 2023; 
and
	•
Have billed for primary health care services for at least six months 
of that taxable year.
Primary care services are defined as family medicine, general pediatric 
medicine, general internal medicine, and the general practice of 
medicine. The provision of limited primary care services as part of a 
specialized medicine practice will not be considered primary health 
care services for purposes of this credit. However, the provision of 
limited specialized services as part of a larger primary health care 
practice will not disqualify the entity.
The credit must be reported on Schedule IN-OCC, found at  
www.in.gov/dor/tax-forms/individual/current. For the PIN, use  
your physician license number without the last letter.
Public School Educator Expense Credit  861
If you are an eligible educator working for an Indiana school 
corporation, you may be entitled to a credit for qualified expenses 
paid for certain classroom supplies. The credit can be as much as $100 
($200 if married filing joint and both spouses meet the requirements, 
but not more than $100 each).
You are an eligible educator if, during the taxable year, you are 
employed as a Kindergarten -12 Indiana public school: 
	•
Teacher
	•
Librarian
	•
Counselor
	•
Principal
	•
Superintendent
Public school means a school maintained by an Indiana school 
corporation, and includes charter schools. Private schools, parochial 
schools and homeschools are not public schools.
Qualified expenses are amounts you paid or incurred during the tax 
year for certain classroom supplies, which include books, supplies, 
computer equipment (including related software and services), 
other equipment, and supplementary materials that you use in the 
classroom. For courses in health and physical education, expenses for 
supplies are qualified expenses only if related to athletics.
Non-qualified expenses are certain expenses not allowed when 
figuring this credit. They include: 
	•
Certain expenses for professional development courses related to 
the curriculum, or to the students, that the educator teaches.
	•
Protective items, such as face masks; disinfectant; hand soap; 
hand sanitizer; disposable gloves; tape, paint, or chalk to guide 
social distancing; physical barriers (for example, clear plexiglass); 
air purifiers; and other items recommended by the CDC to be 
used for the prevention of the spread of disease.
Reimbursements. You must reduce your expenses for the qualified 
supplies by any reimbursements you received that were not included 
in box 1 of your Form W-2.
Example 1. Jonah spent $40 for qualified supplies; he was reimbursed 
for $30 out of petty cash, none of which was included on his W-2. He 
will claim the $10 difference as a credit.
Figure the credit. The amount of the credit is the lesser of:
	•
The total amount paid for qualified supplies, less any 
reimbursements for those qualified supplies not included on line 
1 of your W-2, or 
	•
$100.
Example 2. Quincy is an 8th grade teacher at an Indiana public school. 
During the year he spent $314 for qualified supplies. He is eligible to 
claim a $100 credit.
Example 3. Chris and Pat are employed as teachers at an Indiana 
public high school. They are filing a joint tax return. During the year 
Chris spent $74 for qualified supplies; Chris’s credit is $74. Pat spent 
$214 for qualified supplies; Pat’s credit is $100 (limited to the lesser 
of the amount Pat spent or $100). They will claim a $174 combined 
credit.
Important. Make sure to keep a copy of the expense receipts used to 
figure this credit as DOR can require you to provide this information 
at a later date.
Note. Claiming an educator expense deduction on your federal tax 
return in no way prohibits you from being eligible to claim this credit 
on your state tax return. 
Enter code 861 under line 6 if claiming this credit. See the Combined 
Limitation on page 46. 
Redevelopment Tax Credit  863
You may be eligible for a credit if you make a qualified investment for 
the redevelopment or rehabilitation of real property located within a 
qualified redevelopment site. 
This credit is administered by the Indiana Economic Development 
Corporation (IEDC), One North Capitol, Suite 700, Indianapolis, IN, 
46204. Visit the IEDC website at www.iedc.in.gov or call 317-232-8800 
for additional information.
The approved credit must be reported on Schedule IN-OCC, found at 
www.in.gov/dor/tax-forms/individual/current. Make sure to enclose 
this schedule with your tax filing. Also, see the Combined Limitation 
on page 46.
Residential Historic Rehabilitation Credit  831
A credit is available for the repair and rehabilitation of residential 
property that is listed on the Indiana Register of Historic Sites and 
Structures, is at least 50 years old, and will be used as your primary 
residence. All work must meet the Secretary of the Interior’s Standards 
for Rehabilitation of Historic Properties.
Schedule 6: Offset Credits Continued


--- Page 46 ---

IT-40 Booklet 2024
Page 46
For more information about this credit, see Income Tax Information 
Bulletin #87A at www.in.gov/dor/files/ib87a.pdf. Also, contact the 
Indiana Department of Natural Resources, Division of Historic 
Preservation and Archaeology, 402 W. Washington St., Room W274, 
Indianapolis, IN 46204-2739; call 317-232-1646; or visit  
www.in.gov/dnr/historic-preservation.
Enter code 831 under line 6 if claiming this credit. Also, see the 
Combined Limitation on page 46.
Riverboat Building Credit  832
This credit has been repealed. However, any previously approved yet 
unused credit is available to be claimed. 
Enter code 832 under line 6 if claiming this credit. See the Combined 
Limitation on page 46 for additional limitations.
School Scholarship Credit  849
A credit is available for donations to certain scholarship-granting 
organizations (SGOs). The amount of a taxpayer’s credit is equal 
to 50% of the amount of the contribution made to the SGO for a 
school scholarship program. In some cases, the department may 
round the credit down to the nearest dollar if the department receives 
information that the credit should be the amount as rounded down. 
While there are no limits to how much a donor can contribute to a 
qualified SGO, the entire tax credit program cannot award more than 
$18.5 million in credits per state fiscal year. 
To qualify for the credit, you must make a contribution to a 
scholarship granting organization that is certified by Department 
of Education. Visit the Indiana Department of Education’s website 
www.in.gov/doe/students/indiana-choice-scholarship-program for 
additional information.
The approved credit must be reported on Schedule IN-OCC, found at 
www.in.gov/dor/tax-forms/individual/current. Make sure to enclose 
this schedule with your tax filing. Also, see the Combined Limitation 
on page 46.
Venture Capital Investment Credit  835
A taxpayer that provides qualified investment capital to a qualified 
Indiana business may be eligible for this credit. 
Certification for this credit must be obtained from the Indiana 
Economic Development Corporation Development Finance Office, 
VCI Credit Program, One North Capitol, Suite 700, Indianapolis, IN 
46204, telephone number 317-232-8800, or visit www.iedc.in.gov.
This credit must be reported on Schedule IN-OCC, found at  
www.in.gov/dor/tax-forms/individual/current. Make sure to enclose 
this schedule with your tax filing. If you are claiming this credit as 
an owner of pass-through entity such as S corporation, partnership, 
limited liability company, etc., make sure to keep Schedule IN K-1 
with your records as DOR can require you to provide this information.
Note. See the Restriction for Certain Tax Credits - Limited to 
One per Project and the Combined Limitation on page 46 for 
additional limitations.
Venture Capital Investment Credit – Qualified Indiana 
Investment Fund  868
A taxpayer who provides qualified investment capital (either debt or equity 
capital) to a qualified Indiana investment fund may be eligible for this credit.
Note. Certification for this credit must be obtained from the Indiana 
Economic Development Corporation, Development Finance Office, VCI 
Credit Program, One North Capitol, Suite 700, Indianapolis, IN 46204.
This credit must be reported on Schedule IN-OCC, found at  
www.in.gov/dor/tax-forms/individual/current. Make sure to enclose 
this schedule with your tax filing.
Apply online through the IEDC’s website at www.iedc.in.gov or call 
317-232-8800 for more information.
Enclose the certification letter from the IEDC with the return, 
otherwise the credit will be denied.
Restriction for Certain Tax Credits - Limited to One 
Per Project
A taxpayer may not be granted more than one credit for the same 
project. The credits that are included are the alternative fuel vehicle 
manufacturer credit, community revitalization enhancement district 
credit, enterprise zone investment cost credit, Hoosier business 
investment credit, industrial recovery credit, and the venture capital 
investment credit. Apply this restriction first when figuring your 
credits. Then apply the Combined Limitation below.
Combined Limitation
There is one final limitation if you have more than one credit to 
be entered on lines 4 through 7 of Schedule 6. These credits, when 
combined, cannot be greater than the state adjusted gross income tax 
shown on Form IT-40 line 8; if they are, adjust the amounts before you 
enter them. This includes any credits reported on Schedule IN-OCC, 
and carried to line 7 of Schedule 6.
How to Adjust the Amount of Credit to Enter (Examples)
Example. Miranda is eligible to claim both a $200 College Credit and a 
$300 Credit for Taxes Paid to Other States, for a $500 total amount of 
offset credits. Her state adjusted gross income tax due (IT-40, line 8) 
is $360. Since her combined credits are $140 more than her state tax 
due, she should reduce the last entry (the $300 Credit for Taxes Paid 
to Other States) by the $140 difference to $160. She will enter the full 
$200 College Credit on Schedule 6, line 4, and the $160 limited Credit 
for Taxes Paid to Other States on line 5.
Example. Matthew has a $500 Indiana529 Savings Plan Credit and a 
$600 Industrial Recovery Credit. His state adjusted gross income tax 
due (IT-40, line 8) is $700. He will report the full $500 Indiana529 
Savings Plan Credit on Schedule 6, line 6a, and enter $200 of the 
Industrial Recovery Credit on line 6b. He will carry the $400 
remaining unused Industrial Recovery Credit over to next year’s tax 
return.
Schedule 6: Offset Credits Continued


--- Page 47 ---

IT-40 Booklet 2024
Page 47
Schedule 7: Additional Required 
Information
Line 1 – Federal Filing Information
You must place an “X” in the “yes” or “no” box to answer the question: 
“Are you filing a federal income tax return for 2024?”
Line 2 – Out-Of-State Income Information
If you and/or your spouse worked in Illinois, Kentucky, Michigan, 
Ohio, Pennsylvania and/or Wisconsin during 2024, complete this area. 
Enter the salary, wage, tip and/or other compensation income from 
those states in the appropriate boxes and the 2-digit code number for 
the appropriate state in the boxes. Find the 2-digit code number on the 
chart in the next column.
State
Use Code #
State
Use Code #
Illinois
94
Ohio
97
Kentucky
95
Pennsylvania
98
Michigan
96
Wisconsin
99
Note. This entry is for information purposes only, and will not change 
your refund or the amount you may owe.
Line 3 – Extension of Time to File Information
Place an “X” in the box on line 3a if you have a federal extension of 
time to file (you filed federal Form 4868, Form 2350, or made an 
online extension payment). Place an “X” in the box on line 3b if you 
have an Indiana extension of time to file (you filed Form IT-9 or made 
an online extension payment). 
Line 4 – Farmers and Fishermen
Farmers and fishermen have special filing considerations. If at least 
two-thirds (2/3) of your gross income is from farming or fishing, 
mark the box provided on Schedule 7, line 4. This will make sure 
that a penalty for the underpayment of estimated tax is not assessed 
provided you have followed through by:
	•
Paying all your estimated tax on or by Jan. 15, 2025, and filing 
your Form IT-40 by April 15, 2025, or
	•
Filing your Form IT-40 by March 3, 2025, and paying all the tax 
due at that time. You are not required to make an estimated tax 
payment if you use this option.
Important. If you have checked the box, you must keep the completed 
Schedule IT-2210 with your records as DOR may request it at a later date.
Line 5 – Non- or Partially- Responsible Spouse
Place an X in this box if you are a spouse who claims to not be liable 
for all or part of a tax liability because the remaining liability is that of 
the other spouse. You may be filing as a spouse who claims to not be 
liable for all or part of a tax liability if: 
	•
You have a tax liability reported on a joint return for which you 
are not responsible;
	•
You have a tax liability reported on a joint return, but you are 
responsible only for a portion of the liability; or
	•
You have received an assessment from the Indiana Department of 
Revenue and you are not liable for all or part of the assessment 
because the assessment arises from the tax attributable to your 
spouse.
If filing as a non- or partially- responsible spouse who claims to not 
be liable for all or part of a tax liability, complete and submit Schedule 
IN-40PA (www.in.gov/dor/tax-forms/individual/current), along with 
any supporting documentation.
Line 6 – Date of Death
If the taxpayer and/or spouse died during 2024, and this return is 
being filed with his/her name on it, make sure to enter the month 
and day of death in the appropriate box. For example, a date of death 
of Jan. 9, 2024, would be entered as 01/09/2024. See instructions 
beginning on page 7 for more information.
Note. If the taxpayer and/or spouse died before 2024, or after Dec. 31, 
2024, but before filing his or her tax return, do not enter his/her date 
of death in this box.
Line 7 – Telephone Number and Email Address 
Information
If this is a joint return, both you and your spouse must sign and date 
the tax return. Please enter your daytime telephone number so we can 
call you if we have any questions about your tax return. Also, enter your 
email address if you would like us to be able to contact you by email.
Personal Representative Information
Typically, DOR will contact you (and your spouse, if filing jointly) if there 
are any questions or concerns about your tax return. If you wish to allow 
DOR to discuss your tax return with someone else (e.g. the person who 
prepared it, a relative or friend, etc.), you will need to complete this area. 
First, you must check the “Yes” box, which follows the sentence, 
“I authorize DOR to discuss my tax return with my personal 
representative.”
Next, enter the name of the individual you are designating as your 
personal representative, that person’s telephone number, and that 
person’s complete address.
If you complete this area, you are authorizing DOR to be in contact with 
someone other than you concerning information about this tax return. 
Note. If you are due a refund, it will be paid to you (and your spouse, 
if filing jointly) even if you designate a personal representative.
You may decide at any time to revoke the authorization for DOR to 
speak with your personal representative. You will need to provide a 
signed statement indicating you revoke this authorization. Include 
your name, Social Security number and the year of your tax return. 
Mail your statement to Indiana Department of Revenue, P.O. Box 40, 
Indianapolis, IN 46206-0040.
Paid Preparer Information
Have your paid preparer complete this area (even if the paid preparer 
is the same individual designated as your personal representative).  
 
Schedule 7: Additional Required Information


--- Page 48 ---

IT-40 Booklet 2024
Page 48
The paid preparer must provide:
	•
The name of the firm that he/she represents,
	•
The preparer’s tax identification number (PTIN), and
	•
The firm’s address or his/her address if self-employed.
Opt-Out Designation
There are many benefits to electronic filing, which include:
	•
Elimination of math errors
	•
Faster refunds
Paid preparers are required to electronically file all Indiana individual 
income tax returns if they prepare more than 10 tax returns annually. 
If you use a paid preparer and do not want your tax return to be filed 
electronically, you must complete a state Form IN-OPT. This form requires 
your signature (and your spouse’s, if filing jointly), and must be maintained 
by your paid preparer with his or her records. Get Form IN-OPT at  
www.in.gov/dor/tax-forms/individual/current for more information.
Make sure you keep a copy of your completed tax return, including 
all required enclosures, such as W-2s and schedules.
Schedule IT-40NOL and Carryforward 
Worksheet
A separate Schedule IT-40NOL must be used for each 
loss year.
Indiana Code 6-3-2-2.5 and 6-3-2-2.6 allow for a net operating loss 
(NOL) deduction from Indiana adjusted gross income. All loss years 
ending after Jan. 1, 2004, and any existing NOL(s) carried over to a 
taxable year after this date must be recomputed by applying the amended 
provisions of this Act. Deductions for net operating losses that were 
incurred in taxable years ending before Jan. 1, 2004, and carried back 
or forward and deducted in taxable years ending before Jan. 1, 2004, are 
calculated under the law in effect for the year the NOL was incurred.
For tax years 2021 and later, itemized deductions are not permitted in 
determining Indiana net operating losses. In addition, if you have a 
net operating loss carryforward that was calculated in whole or in part 
using an itemized deduction, you must recalculate the net operating 
loss without the itemized deduction in order to determine the amount 
to be carried forward.
Important. In order to carry a pre-2004 Indiana NOL to tax year 2004 
and beyond, you must:
	•
Step 1. Refigure the NOL using the new method on Form IT-
40NOL revised R3/10-04, or after;
	•
Step 2. Reduce the refigured NOL by any amount previously used 
in any pre-2004 intervening year;*
	•
Step 3. Use any remaining NOL on line 17 of Carryforward 
Worksheet 2.
* The application of the NOL in the pre-2004 tax year(s) must conform 
with the rules that govern those years. Do not refigure the amount of 
deduction used in the pre-2004 tax years.
When to use an Indiana NOL
Carryback and carryforward years. Public Law 172-2011 amends IC 
6-3-2-2.5 and IC 6-3-2-2.6. It provides that no Indiana net operating 
loss carryback claim may be filed after Dec. 31, 2011.
Example. Paul has an Indiana NOL for the 2010 tax year. Paul did not 
file an Indiana NOL carryback claim before Jan. 1, 2012. Therefore, he 
will have to carry the loss forward.
Note. This rule will have no impact on carryback claims filed before 
Jan. 1, 2012.
Example. Ross has a $200,000 Indiana NOL for the 2010 tax year. In 
Oct. of 2011 he carried this loss back to his 2008 and 2009 Indiana 
returns. He used $75,000 of the loss in 2008, and $100,000 of the loss 
in 2009. He has a $25,000 loss available to be carried to tax year 2011.
Indiana NOLs may be carried forward for up to 20 years following the 
loss year (HEA 1316-2018(ss), Sec. 5). 
Note. If you potentially had a net operating loss for 2018 through 
2021, please see the specific modifications for Line 2 related to those 
years and later. 
Part 1 – Computation of Indiana NOL
Enter the loss year (this is the year in which the NOL occurred).
P.L. 81-2004, effective Jan. 1, 2004, provides for an NOL deduction from 
Indiana adjusted gross income equal to the amount of a federal NOL, 
computed under IRC Section 172, for the taxable year, that is derived 
from sources from within Indiana, and adjusted for modifications under 
IC 6-3-1-3.5. The federal NOL for individuals, which reflects the IRC 
Section 172 application, is computed on IRS Form 172, Part 1, or the 
equivalent worksheet from IRS Publication 536.
Note. The use of Indiana modifications may result in an Indiana net 
operating loss even if there is no federal NOL.
Line 1. Enter your adjusted gross income from Line 1 of Form IT-40. 
Line 2. Enter the sum of certain Indiana add-backs and deductions 
here. The amount will be the 100-code add-backs other than Code 155 
minus the 600 code deductions. For years before 2023, the 100-series 
codes listed below will be reported on Line 2 of the IT-40NOL and 
the 600-series codes will be reported on Line 5 of the IT-40NOL. 
Please note the years specified for each code. If no year is listed, the 
modification is required for all years.
	•
Tax add-back – 100 
	•
Net operating loss carryforward – 101 
	•
Lump sum distribution – 102 (2003-2015 only) 
	•
Section 179 expense – 105 
	•
Bonus depreciation – 104
	•
Unemployment compensation – 106 (2009 only)
	•
Deferral of business indebtedness discharge and reacquisition – 
107 (2009-present)
	•
Qualified disaster assistance property – 110 (2009-present)
Schedule IT-40NOL Instructions


--- Page 49 ---

IT-40 Booklet 2024
Page 49
	•
Qualified refinery property – 111 (2009-present)
	•
Qualified restaurant property – 108 (2009-present)
	•
Qualified film or television production – 112 (2009-present)
	•
Qualified preferred stock – 113 (2009-present)
	•
Qualified retail improvement property – 109 (2009-present)
	•
Educator expense – 124 (2010-2012)
	•
Employer-provided educational expenses – 125** (2010-2012) 
	•
IRA charitable distribution – 122** (2010-2012)
	•
Qualified transportation fringe expenses – 127** (2010-2012)
	•
Student loan interest – 128** (2010-2012)
	•
Tuition and fees – 123**(2010-2012)
	•
Discharge of debt of a principal residence – 117 (2010-2015)
	•
Motorsports entertainment complex – 130** (2010-present)
	•
Qualified advance mining safety equipment – 126** 
(2010-present)
	•
Qualified environmental remediation costs – 121** 
(2010-present)
	•
Qualified leasehold improvement property – 129** (2010-present)
	•
Start-up expenditures – 131** (2010-present)
	•
Certain trade or business deductions based on employment of 
unauthorized alien – 132 (2011-2015)
	•
OOS municipal obligation interest – 137 (2012-present)
	•
Federal Repatriated Dividend Deduction Add-Back –  139 
(2017-present)
	•
Excess federal interest (under IRC Section 163(j)) – 142 
(2018-present)
	•
Student loan payments made by an employer and excluded 
from federal gross income, net of interest that would have been 
permitted for federal purposes absent the federal exclusions – 148 
	•
Student loan debt discharged under IRC section 108(f)(5) except 
those excluded as a result of death, total and permanent disability, 
or bankruptcy – 150 (2021-present)
	•
50% of certain meals deducted in determining AGI – 149 
(2021-present)
	•
Modifications for Excess Business Losses – 151 (2023-present)
	•
Modifications from Excess Inclusion Income – 153 (2023-present)
	•
Specified Research and Experimental Expenses Add-Back – 154 
(2023-present)
	•
Military service deduction – 613 (2024)
	•
Non-Indiana locality earnings deduction – 614 (2003-2015)
	•
Homeowner’s residential property tax deduction - 604
	•
State tax refund and/or other recovered itemized deductions – 618 
	•
Interest from U.S. government obligations – 610 
	•
Social Security and/or benefits issued by the U.S. Railroad 
Retirement Board – 624 
	•
Indiana partnership long-term care policy premiums deduction – 608
	•
Human services deduction – 605
	•
Qualified patent income exemption – 622 (2009-present)
	•
National Guard and reserve component member’s deduction – 
621 (2009-present)
	•
Nonresident military spouse earned income deduction – 625 
(2009-present)
	•
Government or civic group capital contribution deduction – 633 
(2018-present)
	•
COVID-related ERC expense deduction – 634 (2021-present)
	•
Indiana education scholarship account grant deduction – 635 
(2021-present)
	•
Indiana enrichment scholarship account deduction – 638 
(2022-present)
	•
Student loan interest deduction for interest paid from student 
loan payments required to be added back – 637 (2022-present)
	•
Small Employer Health Insurance Premium Deduction – 639 (2023)
	•
Specified Research and Experimental Expenses Deduction – 641 
(2023)
	•
Indiana career scholarship account deduction – 642 (2023)
	•
Any other modification reported using Code 120 or Code 147 
(2010-present for 120, 2020-present for 147). This includes, 
without limitation:
	ο
Excess business losses permitted for federal purposes but not 
Indiana purposes (2018-2020)
	ο
Charitable contributions deductions claimed by individuals 
in determining federal AGI – (2020 only)
	ο
Unemployment excluded from federal gross income (2020 only)
	ο
Any late-added modifications listed in this list for 2021 to 
present but which were required or permitted for 2020.
Note. Prior to completing line 3, you will need to complete IRS Form 
172, Part 1, or the equivalent worksheet from IRS Publication 536. 
Line 3. Add the following amounts from IRS Form 172, Part 1, or the 
equivalent worksheet from IRS Publication 536, and enter on line 3:
	•
Line 9 minus any itemized or standard deductions included in 
line 6, but not less than zero.
	•
Line 17
	•
Line 21
	•
Line 22
If you are adding one or more of these amounts, also complete 
Schedule NOL-MOD, Part 1 to report these amounts.
Line 4. Enter the total of lines 1 through 3. If this number is greater 
than zero, enter 0.
Line 5. If you have a federal excess business loss for the current year, 
enter your excess business loss from IRS Form 1040, Schedule 1, line 
8p as a negative number. If you have a federal net operating loss for 
the current year after determining excess inclusion income, enter the 
portion of federal net operating loss that equals your excess inclusion 
income as a negative number. If you have current-year Indiana net 
operating losses from estate or trust terminations, enter those losses 
as a negative number. Do not include any net operating losses carried 
forward from prior years. If you have an amount reported on this line, 
also complete Schedule NOL-MOD, Part 2.
Note. If you have a deduction permitted as part of your federal net 
operating loss but not deducted in determining federal adjusted gross 
income, such as a federal itemized deduction, enter the net operating 
loss determined as if that deduction was disallowed for federal purposes.
Line 6. If you have a Code 151 or Code 153 adjustment, include that 
adjustment on this line. If Code 151 is a negative number, enter that 
amount as a positive number on line 6. If Code 153 is a negative 
number, enter that amount as a positive number on line 6. Also 
complete Schedule NOL-MOD, Part 2, to report these amounts.
Line 7. Add lines 5 and 6. If line 7 is greater than 0, enter zero.
Schedule IT-40NOL Instructions Continued


--- Page 50 ---

IT-40 Booklet 2024
Page 50
Line 8. Add lines 4 and 7. If this number is negative, this is your net 
operating loss available for carryforward. If this number is zero, you 
do not have a net operating loss.
Part 2 – Record of Indiana NOL Application
Column 1. List the year(s) to which you are carrying the loss.
Column 2. Enter the amount of Indiana AGI available to be offset 
from line 5 of the completed Carryforward Worksheet.
Column 3. Enter as a positive amount the Indiana NOL available for 
deduction from line 6 of the completed Carryforward Worksheet.
Column 4. Enter the amount from either line 7 or line 8 of the 
Carryforward Worksheet (only one of those lines will have an entry).
Column 5. Enter the amount from line 9 of the completed Carryforward 
Worksheet. This is your Indiana NOL deduction. Enter on IT-40 
Schedule 1 (Schedule 2 for the 2009 tax year and beyond), under line 11, 
or IT-40PNR Schedule B (Schedule C for the 2009 tax year and beyond), 
under line 11. If carrying the loss forward to a tax year which has already 
been filed, enter the amount on Form IT-40X, line 1, Column B.
Schedule IT-40NOL Carryforward Worksheet
A Carryforward Worksheet must be completed for each loss year. If 
you are carrying your loss forward for more than five years, modify the 
top of the column to show the year to which it is being carried.
Example. Modify Column A, ‘1st’ following year, to read ‘6th’ 
following year.
Before you begin. You must have a completed state tax return (not 
including the Indiana NOL deduction) for the intervening year(s) in 
which you are applying the loss. For 2024 and later, you may also need 
to complete Schedule NOL-MOD.
Note. If you have a debt that was discharged by a Title 11 bankruptcy, 
a debt that was discharged while you were insolvent, or a discharged 
debt that was qualifying farm indebtedness, you will be required to 
reduce your net operating losses available for carryforward. Your 
loss reduction will equal the amount of the indebtedness listed above 
minus any portion of the indebtedness applied against basis, capital 
loss, and passive loss/credit attributes. This reduction is to be applied 
first against the current year net operating loss, then against loss 
carryforwards in the order in which they were incurred, from oldest to 
newest. In the case of discharges from partnerships or S corporations, 
the insolvency rules are consistent with federal law.
Columns A – E. Enter in Column A information from the first year 
following the loss year. Enter in Column B information from the second 
year following the loss year. Complete the remaining columns accordingly.
Example. The loss year is 2009. Column A should reflect information 
from tax year 2010; Column B should reflect information from tax 
year 2011, and so on.
Schedule IT-40NOL Instructions Continued
Intervening year. Year to which a loss is being carried.
Complete lines 1 through 5 of the Carryover Worksheet to figure 
the intervening year’s Indiana AGI.
Line 1. Enter the amount from line 1 of the intervening year’s IT-40 or 
IT-40PNR.
Note. If reporting from the IT-40PNR for tax year 2008 or before, skip 
line 2 and enter this amount on line 3.
Line 2. Net the following Indiana add-backs as reported on the 
intervening year’s return.
For tax years 2003 and beyond, add the 100-series modifications 
applicable for the taxable year. See the instructions for Line 2 of the IT-
40NOL for a list of modifications. Also report any discharges required 
to be applied to net operating loss carryforwards. For 2024 and later, 
also see the instructions for Code 155 on page 14.
If you reported any of the above on your 2012 tax return, and you 
utilized Option 2 to report them as a negative add-back on your 2013 
return (using a 300-series 3-digit code number in lieu of filing an 
amendment for 2012), do not include these amounts on line 2 when 
2013 is the intervening year.
Line 3. Add lines 1 and 2 and enter the result here.
Line 4. Enter the net of certain deductions as claimed on the 
intervening year’s return. These are the 600-code deductions listed in 
Part 1, line 2, along with the total exemptions claimed.
Line 5 – Intervening year’s Indiana AGI. Subtract line 4 from line 3 
(if less than zero, enter zero).
Line 6. NOL available for carryforward. Enter here the amount from 
Schedule IT-40NOL, Part 1, line 8 (enter as a positive amount).
	•
If this is the first time the NOL from Schedule IT-40NOL, Part 1, 
line 8, is being used, then enter the full amount here. 
	•
If you have already used the NOL from Schedule IT-40NOL, Part 
1, line 8, to offset income, then enter the remaining available loss 
here (from line 8 of the Carryforward Worksheet). See line 8 
instructions.    
Complete line 7 OR line 8 based on the following:
	•
If line 5 is greater than line 6, complete line 7.
	•
If line 6 is greater than line 5, complete line 8.
Line 7. If the line 5 intervening year’s Indiana AGI is greater than or 
equal to the line 6 NOL available for carryforward, then you will use 
all of the available NOL as a deduction. Subtract line 6 from line 5 and 
enter the difference here. Skip line 8 and complete line 9.
Line 8. If the line 6 NOL available for carryforward is greater than the 
line 5 intervening year’s Indiana AGI, then you will be able to offset 
the entire intervening year’s Indiana AGI and have a reduced NOL 
available to carry to other years. Subtract line 5 from line 6 and enter 
the difference here and on line 6 in the next column.


--- Page 51 ---

IT-40 Booklet 2024
Page 51
Line 9. Enter the smaller of the amount on line 5 or line 6. This is your 
Indiana NOL deduction. Enter on IT-40 Schedule 1 (Schedule 2 for 
the 2009 tax year and beyond), under line 11, or IT-40PNR Schedule 
B (Schedule C for the 2009 tax year and beyond), under line 11. If 
carrying the loss forward to a tax year which has already been filed, 
enter the amount on Form IT-40X, line 4, Column B.
County Tax Instructions 
If you live or work in an Indiana county as of Jan. 1 of the tax year, you 
will probably owe county tax. Complete the county tax Schedule CT-
40 to figure if you do owe, and how much it will be.
County Where You Lived Defined
The county where you lived is the county where you maintained your 
home on Jan. 1, 2024. If you had more than one home in Indiana on 
this date, then your county of residence as of Jan. 1, 2024, was:
	•
Where you were registered to vote. If this did not apply, then your 
county of residence was
	•
Where your personal automobile was registered. If this did not 
apply, then your county of residence was
	•
Where you spent the majority of your time in Indiana during 
2024.
Enter the county two-digit code for the county where you lived on Jan. 1, 
2024, in the area beneath the name and address area on Form IT-40. Find 
your county two-digit code number on the back of Schedule CT-40.
Did You Move During the Year?
If you moved your residence to a different Indiana county during the 
year, but after Jan. 1, 2024, the county where you lived for tax purposes 
will not change until next year. 
Example. William was a lifelong Scott County resident until he moved 
to Martin County on March 15, 2024. He will figure Scott County tax 
when filing his 2024 state tax return (he lived there on Jan. 1, 2024). 
If he still lived in Martin County on Jan. 1, 2025, he will figure Martin 
County tax when filing his 2025 state taxes. 
County Where You Worked Defined
The county where you worked (county of principal employment) is 
the county where your main place of business was located or where 
your main work activity was performed on Jan. 1, 2024. If you began 
working in another county after Jan. 1, 2024, the county where you 
worked for reporting purposes will not change until next year. Enter 
the two-digit code number for the county where you worked in the 
area beneath the name and address area on Form IT-40.
Example. Jessie worked in Marion County on Jan. 1, 2024. She quit 
that job and began a new one in Johnson County on Feb. 10, 2024. She 
will enter the Marion County two-digit code (49) as the county where 
she worked even though she changed jobs during the year.
If you had more than one job on Jan. 1, 2024, your principal place 
of employment is the county where you worked the most hours and 
earned the most income.
If, on Jan. 1, 2024, your county of principal employment was not in 
Indiana, write county code “00” (out-of-state) in the County Where 
You Worked box on the front of the IT-40.
Exception. If you worked in any of the following states on Jan. 1, 2024, 
enter their two-digit code number (instead of 00):
State
Use Code #
State
Use Code #
Illinois
94
Ohio
97
Kentucky
95
Pennsylvania
98
Michigan
96
Wisconsin
99
Military Personnel
If you were stationed in Indiana, your county of residence is the 
county where you lived on Jan. 1 of the year you entered the military 
service. If, on Jan. 1, 2024, you were single and stationed outside 
Indiana, or you were stationed outside Indiana and your family was 
with you, write county code “00” (out-of-state) in all the county boxes 
on Form IT-40 (you won’t owe a county tax).
If, however, you maintained your home in an Indiana county and/or 
your spouse and family were still living in an Indiana county on Jan. 
1, 2024, you are considered to be a resident of that county and will be 
subject to county tax.
Retired Persons, Homemakers or Unemployed
If you were retired, a homemaker, or were unemployed on Jan. 1, 
2024, put your county of residence two-digit code number in both 
the Indiana County where you lived and Indiana County Where You 
Worked boxes on Form IT-40. Do not write the word “Retired,” 
“Homemaker” or “Unemployed” over the boxes.
Special Note to Married Taxpayers Filing a Joint Return
If you lived in different counties on Jan. 1, 2024, both of you need 
to figure your county tax separately. See Schedule CT-40 Line 1 
Instructions below for details on how to do this.
Schedule CT-40: Line-by-Line Instructions
Line 1
If you:
	•
Are filing a single return, enter on line 1A the amount from Form 
IT-40, line 7.
	•
Are filing a joint return and you both lived in the same county on 
Jan. 1, 2024, enter on line 1A the amount from Form IT-40, line 7. 
Leave Column B blank.
	•
Are filing a joint return and you lived in different counties on Jan. 
1, 2024, enter each person’s share of the amount reported on line 7 
of Form IT-40. See how to do this in the following example.
Following are two examples for when a taxpayer and spouse file 
married filing jointly but live in different counties on Jan. 1 of the 
tax year.
Example. Jacob and Becca married in 2024 and are filing a joint return. 
On Jan. 1, 2024, Jacob lived in Greene County and Becca lived in 
County Tax Instructions


--- Page 52 ---

IT-40 Booklet 2024
Page 52
Clay County. Their individual share of the $39,080* amount reported 
on line 7 of their IT-40 is to be reported on Schedule CT-40 between 
Column A and Column B in the following way:
Breakdown
Column A 
Jacob
Column B 
Becca
IT-40 
Line 7
Wages
23,000
21,000
44,000
Interest (joint account)
+ 40
+ 40
+ 80
Renter’s deduction
- 1,500
-1,500
-3,000
Subtotal
21,540
19,540
41,080
Exemption
-1,000
-1,000
-2,000
Totals
20,540
18,540
39,080*
Jacob will enter $20,540 on line 1A and Becca will enter $18,540 on 
line 1B.
Use of exemptions when separating income. 
Each spouse must use their own:
	•
Personal $1,000 exemption (included on Schedule 3, line 1), 
	•
Age 65 or older exemption (included on Schedule 3, line 4),
	•
Age additional age 65 exemption (included on Schedule 3, line 5),
when figuring their share of net income subject to county tax. 
Additional exemptions for dependents should be divvied up in whole* 
in a way that provides the most benefit to the individuals. This usually 
results with the individual with the higher county tax rate using all of 
the dependent exemptions when figuring county tax.
Exception. If you or your spouse have negative income after 
exemptions, the negative income amount may be used to reduce the 
positive income of the other spouse. In this situation only can the 
exemptions of one spouse be used to reduce the income of the other 
spouse.
*Exemptions must be used in whole. For example, a $1,000 exemption 
may not be separated into $700 to be used by one spouse, with the 
remaining $300 to be used by the other spouse. The full $1,000 must 
be used by one spouse only.
Note. The total amount of exemptions used to reduce income may not 
be greater than the total amount of exemptions reported on Schedule 
3, line 6. 
Example. Sam and Molly married in 2024 and are filing a joint return. 
On Jan. 1, 2024, Sam lived in County A, which has a resident county 
tax rate of .01. Molly lived in County B, which has a resident county 
tax rate of .025. They claim their three-year old son Sebastian as a 
dependent. Their total exemptions are $4,500 ($1,000 each for Sam, 
Molly and Sebastian, plus the $1,500 additional dependent exemption 
for Sebastian). Sam’s wage income is $49,000; Molly’s is $45,000. They 
claimed a $2,500 homeowner’s property tax deduction.
Molly will use all of the exemptions except for Sam’s $1,000 personal 
exemption when figuring her share of income subject to county tax 
since she has the higher county tax rate.
County Tax Instructions Continued
Their individual share of the $87,000* state taxable income reported 
on line 7 of their Form IT-40 is to be reported on Schedule CT-40 
between Column A and Column B in the following way:
Breakdown
Column A 
Sam
Column B 
Molly
IT-40 
Line 7
Wages
$49,000
$45,000
$94,000
Property tax deduction
-1,250
-1,250
-2,500
Subtotal
$47,750
$43,750
$91,500
Exemptions
-1,000
-3,500
-4,500
Totals
$46,750
$40,250
$87,000*
Sam will enter $46,750 on line 1A and Molly will enter $40,250 on line 1B.
Line 2
Find the county where you lived on Jan. 1, 2024, on the 2024 Indiana 
County Income Tax Rates and County Codes chart located on the 
back of Schedule CT-40. Find the County Tax Rate on that county row 
and enter it here.
If you are filing a single return or a joint return where you both lived 
in the same county on Jan. 1, 2024, enter on line 2A the county tax 
rate. Leave line 2B blank.
If you are filing a joint return and you lived in different counties on 
Jan. 1, 2024:
	•
Enter on line 2A your county tax rate from the county tax rate chart.
	•
Enter on line 2B your spouse’s county tax rate from the county tax 
rate chart.
Line 4
Add the amounts from line 3, Columns A and B and enter the result 
here. If you were a Perry County resident on Jan. 1, 2024, and worked 
in the Kentucky counties of Breckinridge, Hancock and/or Meade, 
review Lines 5 and 6 instructions. Otherwise, skip to line 7.
Lines 5 and 6
If you: 
	•
Were a Jan. 1, 2024, Perry County resident,
	•
Worked in the Kentucky counties of Breckinridge, Hancock and/
or Meade; and
	•
The income from those counties was subject to either a Kentucky 
county income tax or a local income tax for a locality in those 
counties, 
review the following instructions. Otherwise, skip these lines and go 
to line 7.
Line 5 – If the Kentucky counties of Breckinridge, Hancock and/or 
Meade, or a locality located within these counties figured a locality tax 
on your income, enter the amount of that income here.
Line 6 – Multiply the amount on line 5 by .0140 and enter the result 
here. Continue to line 7.
Line 7
Subtract any entry on line 6 from the amount on line 4. Enter the 
result here and on line 9 of Form IT-40.


--- Page 53 ---

IT-40 Booklet 2024
Page 53


--- Page 54 ---

IT-40 Booklet 2024
Page 54
Index to Instructions
2024 Changes............................................................................................  3
A
Add-Backs
Bonus Depreciation Add-Back.........................................................   13
Conformity Add-Back
Conformity Add-Back – Negative Entry.....................................   14
Conformity Add-Back – Positive Entry.......................................   14
Discharge of Debt Reduction of Net Operating Losses................   14
Discontinued Add-Backs: How and When to Report a  
Final Catch-Up Modification..................................................   15
Employer Student Loan Payment Add-Back..................................   14
Excess Federal Interest Deduction Modification...........................   14
Federal Repatriated Dividend Deduction Add-Back....................   14
Meal Deduction Add-Back...............................................................   15
Modifications for Excess Business Losses.......................................   14
Modifications from Excess Inclusion Income................................   15
Net Operating Loss Add-Back..........................................................   13
OOS Municipal Obligation Interest Add-Back..............................   13
Qualified Preferred Stock..................................................................   15
Section 179 Expense Add-Back........................................................   13
Specified Research and Experimental Expenses Add-Back..........   15
Student Loan Discharge Add-Back..................................................   15
Treatment of Previously Discontinued Add-Back.........................   12
Adoption Credit.....................................................................................   32
Adoption Credit Carryforward Worksheets................................  33–34
Amended (Corrected) Tax Return........................................................   5
Amount Due..........................................................................................   11
Annual Public Hearing...........................................................................   5
C
Combined Limitation.....................................................................  37, 46
County Where You Lived Defined......................................................   51
County Where You Worked Defined..................................................   51
Credits
Economic Development for a Growing Economy Credit (EDGE)...  32
Economic Development for a Growing Economy Retention  
Credit (EDGE-R)......................................................................   32
Estimated Tax Paid.............................................................................   30
Headquarters Relocation Credit.......................................................   32
Indiana’s Earned Income Credit (EIC)............................................   30
Indiana State and County Tax Withheld.........................................   29
Lake County (Indiana) Residential Income Tax Credit................   31
Unified Tax Credit for the Elderly....................................................   30
D
Deceased Taxpayer
Date of Death......................................................................................   47
Refund Check for a Deceased Individual..........................................   7
Signing the Deceased Individual’s Tax Return.................................   7
Deductions
Career Scholarship Account Deduction..........................................   19
Civil Service Annuity Deduction.....................................................   20
COVID-related Employee Retention Credit Disallowed  
Expenses Deduction.................................................................   20
Disability Retirement Deduction.....................................................   20
Enterprise Zone Employee Deduction............................................   20
Government or Civic Group Capital Contribution Deduction...   21
Health Care Sharing Ministry Deduction.......................................   21
Human Services Deduction..............................................................   21
Indiana Lottery Winnings Annuity Deduction..............................   21
Indiana Net Operating Loss Deduction..........................................   19
Indiana-only Tax-exempt Bonds Deduction..................................   21
Indiana Partnership Long-Term Care Policy Premiums  
Deduction..................................................................................   21
Infrastructure Fund Gift Deduction................................................   22
Interest on U.S. Government Obligations Deduction...................   17
Nontaxable Portion of Unemployment Compensation................   19
Olympic/Paralympic Medal Winners Deduction..........................   22
Private School/Homeschool Deduction..........................................   18
Qualified Patents Income Exemption Deduction..........................   22
Railroad Unemployment and Sickness Benefits Deduction.........   23
Recovery of Deductions....................................................................   23
Repayment of Previously Taxed Income Deduction.....................   23
Small Employer Health Insurance Premium Deduction..............   23
Specified Research and Experimental Expenses Deduction........   24
State Tax Refund Reported on Federal Return...............................   17
Taxable Social Security and/or Railroad Retirement Benefits  
Deduction..................................................................................   17
Dependents, Claiming more than four..............................................   26
Dependents, Definitions and Special Rules for...........................  27–28
District Office, Visit.................................................................................   4
E
Employer Student Loan Payment Interest Deduction......................   20
Exemptions
Additional Exemption for Age 65 or Older....................................   25
Additional Exemptions for Adopted Child.....................................   25
Age 65 or Older or Blind...................................................................   25
Dependent Exemptions, Additional................................................   26
Extension
Extension Filing Deadline...................................................................   8
Extension of Time to File....................................................................   7
Extension of Time to File Information............................................   47
Form IT-9..............................................................................................   8
Penalty and/or Interest........................................................................   8
Where to Report Your Extension Payment.......................................   8
F
Farmers and Fishermen........................................................................   47
File Your Return
Electronic Filing Program...................................................................   4
INfreefile................................................................................................   4
Foreign Country Code............................................................................   5
H
Help With Your Return
Information Line..................................................................................   4
Internet Address...................................................................................   4
Local Help.............................................................................................   4
Homeowner’s Residential Property Tax Deduction..........................   17


--- Page 55 ---

IT-40 Booklet 2024
Page 55
I
Important Information About Possible Year-End  
Federal Legislation....................................................................   12
Indiana Education Scholarship Account Deduction........................   21
Indiana Enrichment Scholarship Account Deduction.....................   21
Indiana Nongame Wildlife Fund.........................................................   35
Individual Taxpayer Identification Number (ITIN)...........................   5
Information Bulletins, Obtaining..........................................................   4
Interest....................................................................................................   11
L
Losses	.......................................................................................................   6
M
Married Filing Requirements
Married Filing Jointly..........................................................................   5
Married Filing Separately....................................................................   5
Married Persons Who Live Apart Filing Status................................   5
Military Family Relief Fund.................................................................   35
Military Personnel
Military Address...................................................................................   5
Military Personnel, County...............................................................   51
Military Retirement Income and/or Survivor’s Benefits  
Deduction............................................................................  18, 22
Military Service Deduction...............................................................   18
National Guard and Reserve Component Members  
Deduction............................................................................  18, 22
Residency...............................................................................................   7
Move During the Year...........................................................................   51
Moving?....................................................................................................   4
N
Negative Entries.......................................................................................   6
Non- or Partially- Responsible Spouse...............................................   47
O
Offset Credits
College Credit.....................................................................................   37
Community Revitalization Enhancement District Credit............   36
Credit for Local Taxes Paid Outside of Indiana.............................   36
Credit for Taxes Paid to Other States...............................................   37
Other Credits................................................................................  38–46
Other Local Credits............................................................................   36
Opt-Out Designation............................................................................   48
Order of Application.............................................................................   37
Out-Of-State Income Information......................................................   47
P
Paid Preparer Information...................................................................   47
Pass Through Entity Tax Credit...........................................................   29
Payment Options...................................................................................   11
Penalty.....................................................................................................   11
Personal Representative Information.................................................   47
Prior-Year Modifications, Reporting..................................................   16
Public K – 12 Education Fund.............................................................   35
R
Refund
Direct Deposit.....................................................................................   11
Refund Offsets....................................................................................   10
Statute of Limitations for Refund Claims........................................   11
When to Expect Your Refund...........................................................   10
Where’s Your Refund?........................................................................   11
Renter’s Deduction................................................................................   16
Restriction for Certain Tax Credits...............................................  36, 46
Retired Persons, Homemakers or Unemployed................................   51
Returned Checks and Payments..........................................................   12
Rounding Required.................................................................................   6
S
Schedule 1: Add-Backs...................................................................  12–16
Schedule 2: Deductions..................................................................  16–24
Schedule 3: Exemptions..................................................................  24–25
Schedule 4: Other Taxes.......................................................................   29
Schedule 5: Credits..........................................................................  29–32
Schedule 6: Offset Credits..............................................................  36–46
Schedule 7: Additional Required Information............................  47–48
Schedule IN-DEP............................................................................  25–26
Schedule IN-DEP-A..............................................................................   26
Schedule IN-DONATE.........................................................................   35
Schedule IN-W: Indiana Withholding Statements...........................   35
Schedule IT-40NOL........................................................................  48–51
Carryforward Worksheet..................................................................   50
Computation of..................................................................................   48
Record of Indiana NOL Application................................................   50
When to use........................................................................................   48
Schedules, Enclosing...............................................................................   6
Social Security Number....................................................................   5, 28
T
Tax Forms, Obtaining.............................................................................   4
Taxpayer Advocate................................................................................   12
U
Unemployment Compensation Worksheet.......................................   19
W
W-2s, Enclosing.......................................................................................   6
Wagering Taxes......................................................................................   13
Website......................................................................................................   4
What if You Can’t File on Time?............................................................   7
When Should You File?..........................................................................   7
Where to Mail Your Tax Return..........................................................   12
Which Indiana Tax Form Should You File?.........................................   3
Who Should File?....................................................................................   6
Z
ZIP/Postal Code......................................................................................   5


--- Page 56 ---

Indiana Department of Revenue
100 North Senate Avenue
Indianapolis, IN 46204-2253
This IT-40 booklet contains: 
	•
Form IT-40 and Instructions
	•
Schedule 1: Add-Backs
	•
Schedule 2: Deductions
	•
Schedule 3: Exemptions
	•
Schedule 4: Other Taxes
	•
Schedule IN-DEP: Dependent 
Information and Additional 
Dependent Child Information
	•
Schedule IN-DEP-A: Adopted 
Dependent Information
	•
Schedule 5: Credits/Schedule 
IN-DONATE
	•
Schedule 6: Offset Credits
	•
Schedule 7: Additional 
Required Information
	•
Schedule IN-W: Indiana 
Withholding Statements
	•
Schedule CT-40: County Tax 
with tax rates
	•
Schedule IN-EIC: Earned 
Income Credit
	•
Schedule IT-40NOL: 
Individual Income Tax Net 
Operating Loss Computation
	•
Form ES-40: Estimated Tax 
Payment Form
